
    [Federal Register Volume 81, Number 3 (Wednesday, January 6, 2016)]
    [Rules and Regulations]
    [Pages 378-380]
    From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [[www.gpo.gov](http://www.gpo.gov)]
    [FR Doc No: 2015-33264]
    
    
    =======================================================================
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
    
    Food and Drug Administration
    
    21 CFR Part 884
    
    [Docket No. FDA-2015-N-4408]
    
    
    Medical Devices; Obstetrical and Gynecological Devices; 
    Classification of the Intravaginal Culture System
    
    AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.
    
    ACTION: Final order.
    
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is classifying the 
    intravaginal culture system into class II (special controls). The 
    special controls that will apply to the device are identified in this 
    order and will be part of the codified language for the intravaginal 
    culture system's classification. The Agency is classifying the device 
    into class II (special controls) in order to provide a reasonable 
    assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device.
    
    DATES: This order is effective January 6, 2015. The classification was 
    applicable on November 2, 2015.
    
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jason Roberts, Center for Devices and 
    Radiological Health, Food and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire 
    Ave., Bldg. 66, Rm. G218, Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002, 240-402-6400, 
    [jason.roberts@fda.hhs.gov](mailto:jason.roberts@fda.hhs.gov).
    
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
    
    I. Background
    
        In accordance with section 513(f)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
    Cosmetic Act (the FD&C; Act) (21 U.S.C. 360c(f)(1)), devices that were 
    not in commercial distribution before May 28, 1976 (the date of 
    enactment of the Medical Device Amendments of 1976), generally referred 
    to as postamendments devices, are classified automatically by statute 
    into class III without any FDA rulemaking process. These devices remain 
    in class III and require premarket approval, unless and until the 
    device is classified or reclassified into class I or II, or FDA issues 
    an order finding the device to be substantially equivalent, in 
    accordance with section 513(i) of the FD&C; Act, to a predicate device 
    that does not require premarket approval. The Agency determines whether 
    new devices are substantially equivalent to predicate devices by means 
    of premarket notification procedures in section 510(k) of the FD&C; Act 
    (21 U.S.C. 360(k)) and part 807 (21 CFR part 807) of the regulations.
        Section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C; Act, as amended by section 607 of the 
    Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (Pub. L. 112-
    144), provides two procedures by which a person may request FDA to 
    classify a device under the criteria set forth in section 513(a)(1). 
    Under the first procedure, the person submits a premarket notification 
    under section 510(k) of the FD&C; Act for a device that has not 
    previously been classified and, within 30 days of receiving an order 
    classifying the device into class III under section 513(f)(1) of the 
    FD&CAct;, the person requests a classification under section 513(f)(2). 
    Under the second procedure, rather than first submitting a premarket 
    notification under section 510(k) of the FD&C; Act and then a request 
    for classification under the first procedure, the person determines 
    that there is no legally marketed device upon which to base a 
    determination of substantial equivalence and requests a classification 
    under section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C; Act. If the person submits a 
    request to classify the device under this second procedure, FDA may 
    decline to undertake the classification request if FDA identifies a 
    legally marketed device that could provide a reasonable basis for 
    review of substantial equivalence with the device or if FDA determines 
    that the device submitted is not of ``low-moderate risk'' or that 
    general controls would be inadequate to control the risks and special 
    controls to mitigate the risks cannot be developed.
        In response to a request to classify a device under either 
    procedure provided by section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C; Act, FDA will 
    classify the device by written order within 120 days. This 
    classification will be the initial classification of the device.
        On February 23, 2015, INVO Bioscience, submitted a request for 
    classification of the INVOcellTM Intravaginal Culture System 
    under section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C; Act. The manufacturer recommended 
    that the device be classified into class II (Ref. 1).
        In accordance with section 513(f)(2) of the FD&C; Act, FDA reviewed 
    the request for de novo classification in order to classify the device 
    under the criteria for classification set forth in section 513(a)(1). 
    FDA classifies devices into class II if general controls by themselves 
    are insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of safety and 
    effectiveness, but there is sufficient information to establish special 
    controls to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and 
    effectiveness of the device for its intended use. After review of the 
    information submitted in the request, FDA determined that the device 
    can be classified into class II with the establishment of special 
    controls. FDA believes these special controls, in addition to general 
    controls, will provide reasonable assurance of the safety and 
    effectiveness of the device.
        Therefore, on November 2, 2015, FDA issued an order to the 
    requestor classifying the device into class II. FDA is codifying the 
    classification of the device by adding Sec.  884.6165 (21 CFR 
    884.6165).
        Following the effective date of this final classification order, 
    any firm submitting a premarket notification (510(k)) for an 
    intravaginal culture system will need to comply with the special 
    controls named in this final order. The device is assigned the generic 
    name intravaginal culture system, and it is identified as a 
    prescription device intended for preparing, holding, and transferring 
    human gametes or embryos during intravaginal in vitro fertilization 
    (IVF) or intravaginal culture procedures.
        FDA has identified the following risks to health associated 
    specifically with this type of device, as well as the measures required 
    to mitigate these risks in table 1:
    
    [[Page 379]]
    
    
    
       Table 1--Intravaginal Culture System Risks and Mitigation Measures
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Identified risks                   Mitigation measures
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Damage to gametes and/or       Nonclinical performance testing.
     embryos or disruption of the  Shelf life testing.
     IVF process.                  Clinical testing.
                                   Sterilization validation.
                                   Labeling.
    Patient injury (e.g.,          Nonclinical performance testing.
     hypersensitivity, toxicity,   Shelf life testing.
     abrasion, discomfort).        Biocompatibility.
                                   Clinical testing.
                                   Sterilization validation.
                                   Labeling.
    Infection....................  Sterilization validation.
                                   Reprocessing validation.
                                   Nonclinical performance testing.
                                   Shelf life testing.
                                   Clinical testing.
                                   Labeling.
    Transfer of incorrect embryos  Labeling.
     to patient.
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        FDA believes that special controls, in combination with the general 
    controls, address these risks to health and provide reasonable 
    assurance of the safety and effectiveness.
        Intravaginal culture system devices are prescription devices 
    restricted to patient use only upon the authorization of a practitioner 
    licensed by law to administer or use the device; see 21 CFR 801.109 
    (Prescription devices).
        Section 510(m) of the FD&C; Act provides that FDA may exempt a class 
    II device from the premarket notification requirements under section 
    510(k), if FDA determines that premarket notification is not necessary 
    to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the 
    device. For this type of device, FDA has determined that premarket 
    notification is necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety 
    and effectiveness of the device. Therefore, this device type is not 
    exempt from premarket notification requirements. Persons who intend to 
    market this type of device must submit to FDA a premarket notification, 
    prior to marketing the device, which contains information about the 
    intravaginal culture system they intend to market.
    
    II. Environmental Impact, No Significant Impact
    
        The Agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.34(b) that this action is 
    of a type that does not individually or cumulatively have a significant 
    effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental 
    assessment nor an environmental impact statement is required.
    
    III. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
    
        This final order establishes special controls that refer to 
    previously approved collections of information found in other FDA 
    regulations. These collections of information are subject to review by 
    the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction 
    Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520). The collections of information in 
    part 807, subpart E, regarding premarket notification submissions have 
    been approved under OMB control number 0910-0120, and the collections 
    of information in 21 CFR part 801, regarding labeling have been 
    approved under OMB control number 0910-0485.
    
    IV. Reference
    
        The following reference is on display in the Division of Dockets 
    Management (HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
    Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852, and is available for viewing by 
    interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday; it 
    is also available electronically at <http://www.regulations.gov>.
    
    1. DEN150008: De novo Request per 513(f)(2) from INVO Bioscience, 
    dated February 23, 2015.
    
    List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 884
    
        Medical devices.
    
        Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under 
    authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, 21 CFR part 
    884 is amended as follows:
    
    PART 884--OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL DEVICES
    
    0
    1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 884 continues to read as 
    follows:
    
        Authority:  21 U.S.C. 351, 360, 360c, 360e, 360j, 371.
    
    
    0
    2. Add Sec.  884.6165 to subpart G to read as follows:
    
    
    Sec.  884.6165  Intravaginal culture system.
    
        (a) Identification. An intravaginal culture system is a 
    prescription device intended for preparing, holding, and transferring 
    human gametes or embryos during intravaginal in vitro fertilization or 
    intravaginal culture procedures.
        (b) Classification. Class II (special controls). The special 
    controls for this device are:
        (1) Clinical performance testing must demonstrate the following:
        (i) Comfort and retention of the intravaginal culture device;
        (ii) Adverse vaginal tissue reactions associated with intravaginal 
    culture;
        (iii) Maximum number of gametes and/or embryos that can be placed 
    in a device; and
        (iv) Rates of embryo development to the designated stage, 
    implantation rates, clinical pregnancy rates, live birth rates, and any 
    adverse events or outcomes.
        (2) Nonclinical performance testing must demonstrate that the 
    device performs as intended under anticipated conditions of use. The 
    following performance characteristics must be demonstrated:
        (i) Mouse embryo assay testing to assess embryotoxicity by 
    evaluating the gamete and embryo-contacting device components effect on 
    the growth and development of mouse embryos to the blastocyst stage;
        (ii) Endotoxin testing on gamete and embryo-contacting components 
    of the device;
        (iii) Cleaning and disinfection validation of reusable device 
    components;
        (iv) Sterility maintenance of the culture media within the device 
    throughout the vaginal incubation
    
    [[Page 380]]
    
    period and subsequent embryo extraction; and
        (v) Ability of the device to permit oxygen and carbon dioxide 
    exchange between the media contained within the device and the external 
    environment throughout the vaginal incubation period.
        (3) The patient-contacting components of the device must be 
    demonstrated to be biocompatible.
        (4) Performance data must demonstrate the sterility of the device 
    components intended to be provided sterile.
        (5) Shelf life testing must demonstrate that the device maintains 
    its performance characteristics and the packaging of device components 
    labeled as sterile maintain integrity and sterility for the duration of 
    the shelf life.
        (6) Labeling for the device must include:
        (i) A detailed summary of the clinical testing, including device 
    effectiveness, device-related complications, and adverse events;
        (ii) Validated methods and instructions for reprocessing of 
    reusable components;
        (iii) The maximum number of gametes or embryos that can be loaded 
    into the device;
        (iv) A warning that informs users that the embryo development is 
    first evaluated following intravaginal culture; and
        (v) A statement that instructs the user to use legally marketed 
    assisted reproductive technology media that contain elements to 
    mitigate the contamination risk (e.g., antibiotics) and to support 
    continued embryonic development over the intravaginal culture period.
        (7) Patient labeling must be provided and must include:
        (i) Relevant warnings, precautions, and adverse effects and 
    complications;
        (ii) Information on how to use the device;
        (iii) The risks and benefits associated with the use of the device; 
    and
        (iv) A summary of the principal clinical device effectiveness 
    results.
    
        Dated: December 30, 2015.
    Leslie Kux,
    Associate Commissioner for Policy.
    [FR Doc. 2015-33264 Filed 1-5-16; 8:45 am]
     BILLING CODE 4164-01-P
    
    
    

