
    [Federal Register Volume 81, Number 5 (Friday, January 8, 2016)]
    [Rules and Regulations]
    [Pages 869-878]
    From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [[www.gpo.gov](http://www.gpo.gov)]
    [FR Doc No: 2016-36]
    
    
    =======================================================================
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    POSTAL REGULATORY COMMISSION
    
    39 CFR Part 3017
    
    [Docket No. RM2015-14; Order No. 2960]
    
    
    Procedures Related to Commission Views
    
    AGENCY: Postal Regulatory Commission.
    
    ACTION: Final rule.
    
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    SUMMARY: The Commission is issuing a set of final rules establishing 
    the Commission's process for developing views to the Secretary of State 
    on certain international mail matters pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). 
    Relative to the proposed rules, the changes are minor in nature.
    
    DATES: Effective: February 8, 2016.
    
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: David A. Trissell, General Counsel, at 
    202-789-6820.
    
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
    
    Table of Contents
    
    I. Introduction
    II. Rulemaking Context
    III. Summary of Proposed Rules
    IV. Review and Analysis of Comments
    V. Ordering Paragraphs
    
    I. Introduction
    
        On July 21, 2015, the Commission issued proposed rules describing 
    general procedures related to the development of the Commission's views 
    on certain international mail matters pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1).\1\ For the reasons discussed below, the Commission adopts 
    final rules on this topic. The final rules reflect several minor 
    revisions to the proposed rules.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \1\ Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, July 21, 2015 (Order No. 
    2602).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    II. Rulemaking Context
    
        In addition to revising the longstanding approach to establishing 
    domestic mail rates and classifications, the Postal Accountability and 
    Enhancement Act (PAEA) of 2006 amended several statutory provisions 
    concerning international mail matters.\2\ One of these amendments 
    directs the Secretary of State, prior to concluding a treaty, 
    convention, or amendment establishing a market dominant rate or 
    classification, to request the Commission's views on the consistency of 
    such rate or classification with the standards and criteria established 
    by the Commission under 39 U.S.C. 3622. 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). Section 
    3622 concerns the establishment of a modern system for regulating rates 
    and classes for market dominant products.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \2\ See Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act, Public Law 
    109-435, 120 Stat. 3198 (2006), section 405(a) (PAEA).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        A companion provision requires the Secretary of State to ensure 
    that each treaty, convention, or amendment concluded under section 
    407(b) is consistent with the Commission's views unless the Secretary 
    makes a written determination that ensuring such consistency is not in 
    the Nation's foreign policy or national security interest. 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(2). Such a written determination must be provided to the 
    Commission, along with a full explanation of the reasons, but portions 
    of the determination may be designated confidential for reasons of 
    foreign policy or national security. Id.
        The introduction of a formal advisory role for the Commission in 
    this area was a significant change from previous law, as previous law 
    did not require the Secretary of State to request the Commission's 
    views in carrying out the Secretary's responsibilities.\3\ 
    Notwithstanding a degree of shared responsibility, the PAEA makes clear 
    that the Secretary of State exercises primary authority for the conduct 
    of foreign policy with respect to international postal services and 
    other international delivery services, including the determination of 
    U.S. positions and the conduct of U.S. participation in negotiations 
    with foreign governments and international bodies. See 39 U.S.C. 
    407(b)(2).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \3\ See 39 U.S.C. 407(d) (1998), amended by the PAEA.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Pursuant to the directive in section 407(c)(1), the Secretary of 
    State requested--and the Commission provided--views on certain 
    proposals submitted for consideration at the quadrennial Universal 
    Postal Union (UPU) Congresses \4\ held in 2008 and 2012, which occurred 
    after enactment of the PAEA. In anticipation of preparing views in 
    connection with the 2012 Congress, the Commission established Docket 
    No. PI2012-1 to receive written comments from the public on the 
    principles that should guide the development of its views.\5\ The 
    Commission closed Docket No. PI2012-1 on January 29, 2015.\6\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \4\ The UPU Congress is the plenipotentiary body of this 
    international organization that has the authority to amend the UPU 
    Acts. These Acts include the UPU Constitution, General Regulations, 
    Rules of Procedure, and Postal Payment Services Agreement.
        \5\ Docket No. PI2012-1, Order No. 1420, Notice Providing 
    Opportunity to Comment on Development of Commission Views pursuant 
    to 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1), July 31, 2012. The next UPU Congress is 
    tentatively scheduled to convene in mid-September 2016 in Istanbul, 
    Turkey.
        \6\ Docket No. PI2012-1, Order No. 2335, Order Closing Docket, 
    January 29, 2015, at 1.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    III. Summary of Proposed Rules
    
        The proposed rules describe general procedures associated with the 
    development of the Commission's views on certain proposals submitted 
    for consideration at UPU Congresses and related meetings. They are 
    patterned on the approach followed in Docket No.
    
    [[Page 870]]
    
    PI2012-1 with several adjustments to reflect the Commission's 
    experience in that docket.
        The proposed rules establish a docket for each UPU Congress and 
    related meetings to serve as an administrative mechanism for soliciting 
    and receiving public comments and posting related notices and 
    documents. Each docket will be established on or about 150 days before 
    the date a UPU Congress is scheduled to convene. As in Docket No. 
    PI2012-1, the Commission will seek comments on the general principles 
    that should guide the Commission in the formation of its views. The 
    proposed rules also allow comments on specific proposals to the extent 
    such proposals are publicly available. Comment deadlines will be 
    established on a case-by-case basis and based on the Commission's 
    assessment of how much time can be allowed, consistent with timely 
    submission of its views to the Secretary of State.
    
    IV. Review and Analysis of Comments
    
    A. Overview
    
        The Commission received initial comments from Joyce Dillard, 
    Federal Express Corporation (FedEx), the Public Representative, and the 
    Postal Service.\7\ The Commission received reply comments from FedEx, 
    United Parcel Service (UPS), the Public Representative, and the Postal 
    Service.\8\ Commenters generally support issuance of rules on 
    procedures for administering certain view-related matters, but seek 
    clarification of, and revisions relating to:
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \7\ Comments Received from Joyce Dillard, August 28, 2015 
    (Dillard Comments); Comments of Federal Express Corporation, August 
    27, 2015 (FedEx Comments); Comments of the Public Representative, 
    August 27, 2015 (PR Comments); and United States Postal Service 
    Comments on Procedures Related to Commission Views, August 27, 2015 
    (Postal Service Comments).
        \8\ Reply Comments of Federal Express Corporation, September 11, 
    2015 (FedEx Reply Comments); Reply Comments of United Parcel Service 
    on the Proposed Rule to Adopt Procedures Related to the Commission's 
    Views on International Postal Agreements, September 11, 2015 (UPS 
    Reply Comments); Errata Notice of United Parcel Service, September 
    14, 2015; and Reply Comments of United Parcel Service on the 
    Proposed Rule to Adopt Procedures Related to the Commission's Views 
    on International Postal Agreements (Corrected and Refiled), 
    September 14, 2015 (Corrected UPS Reply Comments); Reply Comments of 
    the Public Representative, September 11, 2015 (PR Reply Comments); 
    and United States Postal Service Reply Comments on Procedures 
    Related to Commission Views, September 11, 2015 (Postal Service 
    Reply Comments).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
         The applicability of Administrative Procedure Act (APA) 
    procedural requirements to views;
         the scope of comments and scope of Commission views, 
    particularly with regard to the proposed definition of modern market 
    regulation;
         several other matters related to the comment procedure, 
    including the absence of an affirmative right to file reply comments;
         the definition of views;
         the Commission's option to suspend or forego solicitation 
    of comments, including the proposed standard for exercising this 
    option; and
         the availability of proposals and the Commission's views.
        Having considered the comments received, the Commission adopts 
    final rules that reflect several revisions to the proposed rules in 
    response to comments as well as several other minor changes. The latter 
    include revisions to reflect the Commission's intention to designate 
    future dockets established pursuant to 39 CFR part 3017 as 
    ``International Mail'' (IM) dockets, instead of ``Public Inquiry'' (PI) 
    dockets, and to refer to ``comments'' instead of ``public comments.'' 
    The Commission used the IM docket designation prior to the enactment of 
    the PAEA for agency action related to preparation of a series of annual 
    reports to Congress on international mail financial results. This 
    change, which makes it easier for interested persons to locate 
    international documents on the Commission's Web site, requires minor 
    conforming changes to several of the proposed sections of part 3017.
    
    B. Applicability of APA Procedural Requirements to Commission Views
    
        Proposed rules. The Commission proposed adding rules in a new part 
    3017 to provide the public with a description of the general procedures 
    it plans to use in connection with the development of views pursuant to 
    39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1), primarily with regard to obtaining public input. 
    The proposed rules incorporate procedures consistent with the 
    Commission's core responsibility to provide its views to the Secretary 
    of State in a timely manner. The proposed rules also reflect the 
    Commission's commitment to having the docket serve as a mechanism for 
    handling related matters, such as informing the public about the 
    availability of relevant proposals, the Commission's views, or other 
    documents.
        Commenters' positions. FedEx asserts that the proposed docket must 
    comply with the notice and comment requirements of the APA, located in 
    5 U.S.C. 553.\9\ FedEx states that the Commission must employ APA 
    procedures whenever it adopts a rule, and asserts there is ``no 
    reasonable doubt that the [v]iews are a `rule' as defined by the APA.'' 
    FedEx Comments at 8. FedEx acknowledges that there are several 
    exceptions to the APA notice and comment requirements, and comments 
    that the foreign affairs exception is the only one that ``could 
    plausibly be deemed applicable.'' Id. at 8-9.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \9\ FedEx Comments at 8-12; FedEx Reply Comments at 4.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        FedEx asserts that Congress has carefully avoided the procedural 
    dilemma that combining regulatory and executive functions poses by 
    deliberately creating a bifurcated decision-making process in 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1) and (c)(2). Id. at 9. According to FedEx, under this process 
    the Commission's responsibility is to apply title 39 of the U.S. Code 
    to the rates and classifications under consideration, while the 
    responsibility of the Secretary of State is to protect the foreign 
    policy and national security interests of the United States by 
    limiting, if necessary, application of the Commission's views. Id. 
    FedEx acknowledges that the courts have never addressed this 
    bifurcation in the context of the approval of intergovernmental postal 
    agreements, but cites two cases it alleges concern similar bifurcations 
    of regulatory and foreign policy functions in support of its 
    position.\10\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \10\ Id. at 9-10. See South African Airways v. Dole, 817 F.2d 
    119 (D.C. Cir. 1987); and Aerolineas Argentinas S.A. v. U.S. 
    Department of Transportation, 415 F.3d 1 (D.C. Cir. 2005) 
    (hereafter, South African Airways and Aerolineas Argentinas, 
    respectively).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        FedEx contends that South African Airways concerned a bifurcation 
    of functions very similar to those in section 407. FedEx Comments at 9-
    10. As explained by FedEx, in South African Airways, the Court of 
    Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit found it appropriate for a 
    court to review an order of the Secretary of Transportation revoking a 
    permit of a foreign air carrier. Id. at 10. While such orders were 
    subject to disapproval for foreign policy or national defense 
    considerations by the President, the court found that judicial review 
    was appropriate because the Secretary of Transportation's order was 
    based on economic considerations and thus did not encroach on the 
    President's foreign policy powers. Id.
        FedEx contends that the South African Airways holding was confirmed 
    and extended in Aerolineas Argentinas. Id. at 11. In support of this 
    contention, FedEx asserts that the Court of Appeals for the District of 
    Columbia Circuit held that a determination by the Secretary of 
    Transportation that Argentina had unjustly discriminated against U.S. 
    carriers was subject to judicial review
    
    [[Page 871]]
    
    after expiration of the period in which the President could have, but 
    did not, disapprove of the determination. Id. FedEx asserts that the 
    court ``pointedly noted'' that it should not lightly presume that 
    Congress intended to grant the Department of Transportation ``an 
    unreviewable discretion to engage in otherwise noxious 
    decisionmaking.'' Id. FedEx concludes that the two cases demonstrate 
    that the Commission must comply with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553 
    because the Commission's views do not involve a foreign affairs 
    function of the United States. Id. at 11-12.
        UPS supports FedEx's proposal to amend the proposed rules and 
    incorporate APA notice and comment procedures on grounds that the 
    Commission's views meet the definition of a rule under the APA because 
    they are agency statements interpreting or prescribing law or policy. 
    Corrected UPS Reply Comments at 8 n.6. UPS also asserts that the 
    Commission has an important role under section 407(c)(1), noting that 
    the Commission's views should be crucial in determining the Secretary 
    of State's posture in international postal negotiations. Id. at 2. It 
    nevertheless concludes that the foreign affairs exception is 
    inapplicable on grounds that it is a particularly narrow exception to 
    APA notice and comment requirements. Id. at 8-9. UPS asserts that for 
    the exception to apply, the rulemaking should provoke undesirable 
    international consequences, and concludes that complying with APA 
    notice and comment procedures ``could hardly be said'' to produce this 
    result. Id. at 9. UPS also contends that the scope of comments and the 
    Commission's views are limited to compliance with the standards and 
    criteria established by the Commission under 39 U.S.C. 3622 and 
    concludes the foreign affairs exception is inapplicable because 39 
    U.S.C. 3622 does not directly concern foreign affairs. Id.
        The Public Representative and the Postal Service assert that 
    characterization of the Commission's views as a rule under the APA is 
    incorrect.\11\ The Public Representative states that while the APA 
    broadly defines a rule, the definition does not include a statement 
    from an expert agency intended to inform the Secretary of State on the 
    consistency of a potential international agreement with U.S. 
    regulations. PR Reply Comments at 2. Moreover, she contends that a 
    significant characteristic of a rule to which APA notice and comment 
    procedures apply is that the rule must have the force and effect of 
    law. Id. She reasons that a view does not fall under the APA's broad 
    definition of a rule because absent action by the Secretary of State, 
    it lacks any future legal effect. Id. The Public Representative also 
    notes that a UPU body must approve the relevant proposals before they 
    can take effect. Id. at 3.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \11\ PR Reply Comments at 2; Postal Service Reply Comments at 4.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The Public Representative also considers FedEx's reliance on South 
    African Airways misplaced because the order at issue in that case is 
    distinguishable from the Commission's views. Id. First, she asserts 
    that the order from the Secretary of Transportation revoking foreign 
    air carrier permits is distinguishable because the order was presented 
    for presidential review while views are subject to the approval of the 
    Secretary of State. Id. at 3-4. Second, the order at issue in South 
    African Airways revoked a permit, while views provide the Secretary of 
    State with the expert opinion of the agency in the best position to 
    determine the consistency of such rates and classifications with 
    domestic postal law before the Secretary supports or opposes a 
    proposal. Id. at 4. She asserts that Congress intended for views to 
    contribute to the development of the United States' position on a 
    specific foreign relations matter, while the Secretary of 
    Transportation revoked South African Airways' permit pursuant to a 
    foreign policy determination expressed by Congress, by statute, and the 
    President, by executive order. Id. at 4-5.
        The Postal Service asserts that FedEx's assertion that the 
    Commission providing its views to the Secretary of State constitutes 
    issuance of an agency rule pursuant to the APA is simply wrong. Postal 
    Service Reply Comments at 4. It contends that FedEx's discussion of the 
    definition of rule relies on only part of the definition, and that a 
    complete understanding of the APA definition of rule clearly 
    establishes that the views of the Commission are not a rule subject to 
    the APA rulemaking requirements. Id.
        The Postal Service states that a rule as defined by the APA 
    implements, interprets, or prescribes law or policy. Id. at 5. The 
    Postal Service examines each of these characteristics separately as 
    they relate to the role of the Commission in 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) and 
    contends that the views do not constitute rules under the APA. Id. It 
    states that implementation of a law or policy requires an action that 
    results in an impact on a specific party, and contends that views are 
    merely the position of the Commission on the consistency of UPU 
    proposals with U.S. postal laws that assist the Secretary of State in 
    making foreign policy decisions. Id. at 5. The Postal Service asserts 
    that interpretation relates to an agency action to review and provide a 
    true meaning or understanding as to language. Id. It concludes that 39 
    U.S.C. 407(c)(1) does not involve any interpretation by the Commission. 
    Id. Finally, the Postal Service states the Commission's views do not 
    prescribe law or policy within the purview of the Commission; instead, 
    it asserts the views have no legal or policy ramifications, but instead 
    provide interagency guidance. Id. As such, the Postal Service contends 
    these views are not a rule under the APA and the Commission need not 
    comply with the formal rulemaking requirements of title 5 of the United 
    States Code. Id.
        Commission analysis. Under the APA, a rule is defined broadly and 
    includes any agency statement of general or particular applicability 
    and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or 
    policy, including the approval or prescription for the future of rates. 
    5 U.S.C. 551(4). Rulemaking is the agency process for formulating, 
    amending, or repealing a rule.\12\ 5 U.S.C. 551(5). Significantly, 5 
    U.S.C. 553, which addresses rulemakings, provides an exception to the 
    requirements of that provision to the extent a military or foreign 
    affairs function of the United States is implicated by the rulemaking 
    or the rulemaking relates to agency management or personnel or to 
    public property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts. 5 U.S.C. 
    553(a)(1) and (2).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \12\ Rulemaking is one of two categories of agency actions 
    defined in the APA; adjudication is the other. See 5 U.S.C. 551(7). 
    Adjudication involves matters such as the issuance of permits or 
    certificates. 5 U.S.C. 551(8). No commenter addressing APA 
    procedural requirements asserts that development of views involves 
    adjudication.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Under 5 U.S.C. 553, rulemakings generally require that an agency 
    publish a notice concerning the intended rulemaking in the Federal 
    Register and provide an opportunity for commenters to submit written 
    comments. 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(1)-(3); 5 U.S.C. 553(c). Publication of a 
    substantive rule is to occur not less than 30 days before the effective 
    date, except in certain specified circumstances. 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(1)-
    (3).
        FedEx and UPS contend that views are rules as defined by the APA, 
    and as a result, FedEx and UPS assert that the Commission should amend 
    the proposed rules to ensure that the APA's notice and comment 
    requirements are incorporated into the final rules. FedEx Comments at 
    8-12; Corrected UPS
    
    [[Page 872]]
    
    Reply Comments at 8-9. The Postal Service and the Public Representative 
    disagree and provide support for their assertion that the APA's notice 
    and comment requirements do not apply to views. Postal Service Reply 
    Comments at 4-6; PR Reply Comments at 2-5. As a whole, the comments 
    raise two distinct questions concerning the applicability of the APA to 
    views: Whether views constitute rules under 5 U.S.C. 551(4); and 
    whether views must comply with the notice and comment requirements of 5 
    U.S.C. 553 if views are in fact rules under the APA. The Commission 
    concludes that views are not rules as defined by the APA, and that even 
    if views were considered to be rules, they are exempt from the notice 
    and comment requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553.
        Determining whether views are rules under the APA begins with 
    examination of the function the Commission performs in developing views 
    and the statutory authority for the exercise of that function. With 
    respect to function, the plain language of 39 U.S.C. 407 makes clear 
    that Commission views are an interagency advisory communication 
    prepared at the request, and for the sole consideration of, the 
    Secretary of State prior to his/her conclusion of treaties, 
    conventions, or amendments addressing certain international postal 
    rates and classifications. See 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) and (2). This 
    interagency communication advises the Secretary of State on the 
    consistency of those rate and classification proposals with title 39 
    policies. The advisory nature of views is demonstrated by how many 
    steps the views are removed from final international postal rates and 
    classifications. After the Commission transmits its views to the 
    Secretary of State, the Secretary of State then finalizes U.S. 
    positions on UPU proposals consistent with the Commission's views 
    unless the Secretary of State determines foreign policy or national 
    security reasons dictate otherwise. 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(2). The Secretary 
    of State then uses the various U.S. positions to negotiate and act on 
    UPU proposals. The UPU Acts are then amended to incorporate adopted 
    proposals and generally must be signed by the President or his/her 
    delegate for U.S. ratification or accession. The Commission's views are 
    simply too many steps removed from the final rates and classifications 
    adopted by the UPU and signed by the President to be classified as 
    rules. The number of steps between the view and a final binding 
    decision also distinguishes views from the types of orders at issue in 
    South African Airways and Aerolineas Argentinas.\13\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \13\ The two cases are also distinguishable from views on 
    several other grounds, including that the orders in these cases 
    involved action on permits, not rates and classifications. Agency 
    action on permits falls within the APA definition of a license, 
    which is associated with adjudication (and related orders), rather 
    than rulemaking. See 5 U.S.C. 551(8); see also 5 U.S.C. 551(6) and 
    (7). In addition, the facts involved statutory provisions that 
    mandated issuance of an order and directly addressed the terms for 
    judicial review of permit actions, in contrast to section 407's 
    silence on issuance of an order and judicial review.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The advisory, interagency nature of the communication and the 
    subject matter--international rates and classifications--also 
    materially distinguish the Commission's views from the conventional 
    rulemaking activity of ratemaking. The Commission's domestic rate and 
    classification rulemakings typically are not purely advisory in nature, 
    nor are they designed for the sole consideration of the Secretary of 
    State. Instead, these rulemakings are intended to have binding effect 
    on those who are regulated (or engage in activities regulated) by the 
    agency conducting the rulemaking. However, the Secretary of State 
    pursuant to title 39 exercises the primary authority for the conduct of 
    foreign policy with respect to international postal and delivery 
    services, including the determination of U.S. positions in negotiations 
    with foreign governments and international bodies. See 39 U.S.C. 
    407(b)(2).
        The Commission provides advisory views to the Secretary of State, 
    which are distinct from rules under the APA that directly implement, 
    interpret, or prescribe law or policy with respect to the application 
    of future rates, wages, or prices. Commission views do not prescribe, 
    establish, or enforce international rates or classifications. These 
    considerations all support the conclusion that views sent to the 
    Secretary of State are a statutory responsibility that falls outside 
    the APA's definition of a rule.
        Even if views were considered rules under the APA, the notice and 
    comment requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553 do not apply. First, under the 
    APA, substantive legislative rules are the only rules subject to the 
    notice and comment requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553.\14\ Legislative rules 
    are defined as ``those that grant rights, impose obligations, or 
    produce other significant effects on private interests.'' Id. (citing 
    Batterton v. Marshall, 648 F.2d 694, 701-02 (D.C. Cir. 1980)). 
    Legislative rules also must have legal effect. Id. The test for 
    determining whether a rule has legal effect involves consideration of 
    the following factors: ``(1) Whether in the absence of the rule there 
    would not be an adequate legislative basis for enforcement action or 
    other agency action to confer benefits or ensure the performance of 
    duties, (2) whether the agency has published the rule in the Code of 
    Federal Regulations, (3) whether the agency has explicitly invoked its 
    general legislative authority, [and] (4) whether the rule effectively 
    amends a prior legislative rule.'' Id. (citing Am. Mining Cong. v. Mine 
    Safety & Health Admin., 995 F.2d 1106, 1112 (D.C. Cir. 1993)). Courts 
    also consider the agency's characterization of its rule and whether the 
    rule has been applied consistently in the past. Id.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \14\ Perez v. Mortgage Bankers Assn, 135 S.Ct. 1199, 1203-04 
    (2015); Mountain States Health Alliance v. Burwell, No. 13-641, 2015 
    WL 5297498, at *7 (D.D.C. Sep. 10, 2015).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The Commission's views are not substantive legislative rules. They 
    do not grant rights or impose obligations, nor do they produce other 
    significant effects on private interests; instead, they simply advise 
    the Secretary of State. They have not been and will not be published in 
    the Federal Register. The Commission provides its advisory views in 
    accordance with 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1), which does not grant the 
    Commission general legislative authority. Views, unlike regulations, do 
    not amend past views but instead address current UPU proposals. 
    Therefore, even if views were considered to be rules, the notice and 
    comment requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553 do not apply.
        Second, views are also exempt from APA notice and comment 
    requirements pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(1) as an agency action 
    involving a foreign affairs function. In considering the applicability 
    of the foreign affairs exception, the initial question is whether a 
    view involves a foreign affairs function. Several factors support the 
    conclusion that this is the case with Commission views. For example, 
    the Commission's responsibility for developing a view is lodged in 39 
    U.S.C. 407(c)(1). The parent provision, 39 U.S.C. 407, is captioned 
    ``International postal arrangements.'' Also, contextually, the plain 
    language of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) establishes the requisite nexus to a 
    foreign affairs function by providing that ``before concluding any 
    treaty, convention, or amendment'' that establishes a rate for a market 
    dominant product, the Secretary of State shall request the Commission's 
    views. By definition, the Commission is advising the Secretary of State 
    on matters directly related to foreign affairs--the terms of 
    international postal treaties, conventions, and amendments.
    
    [[Page 873]]
    
        As exemptions to the APA's procedural requirements are to be 
    narrowly construed, the second question is whether a rulemaking would 
    unduly interfere with the asserted foreign affairs function. If not, 
    the exemption generally does not apply.\15\ The critical considerations 
    associated with 39 U.S.C. 407(c), in terms of the Commission's role, 
    are the soundness and timeliness of the views, as the Secretary of 
    State must have an opportunity to review and assess them prior to 
    concluding his/her responsibilities under 39 U.S.C. 407(c), which 
    includes development of U.S. positions on UPU proposals.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \15\ See United States Department of Justice, Attorney General's 
    Manual on the Administrative Procedure Act 26 (1947), noting that 
    the Senate and House reports stated that the phrase ``foreign 
    affairs function'' is not to be loosely interpreted to mean any 
    function extending beyond the borders of the United States, but only 
    to those ``affairs'' which so affect relations with other 
    governments that, for example, the public rulemaking provisions 
    would clearly provoke definitely undesirable international 
    consequences. In addition, it has been held that modification, 
    interpretation, or violation of an international agreement's terms 
    are clearly and directly matters of foreign affairs. Mast 
    Industries, Inc. v. Regan, 596 F. Supp. 1567, 1579 (1984).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        In practice, the development of the Commission's view occurs within 
    an extremely compressed timetable. Given this practical reality, 
    compliance with all APA procedural requirements would hamstring the 
    Commission's ability to provide the Secretary of State with sound, 
    timely views. A brief review of the process illustrates the 
    difficulties.
        First, development of a Commission view typically occurs in the 
    context of a UPU Congress. The UPU is solely responsible for 
    determining the distribution schedule for the proposals the Commission 
    reviews. In light of different submission deadlines and the need for 
    translation, typically the UPU does not make all proposals available at 
    once, and often makes many proposals available only very near the start 
    of a UPU Congress. In some cases, amendments to proposals are only made 
    available immediately before the meeting at which the proposals are to 
    be considered. In addition, verbal amendments may be proposed during 
    deliberations.
        Second, the Commission is unable to ensure the availability of the 
    proposals to interested parties because the UPU does not make them 
    publicly available.
        Third, upon receipt of the proposals, development of views entails 
    deliberations by the Commission and coordination of a view in time for 
    the Secretary of State to have a meaningful opportunity to consider the 
    Commission's advice. In cases when proposals are made available by the 
    UPU with very little time for evaluation, the Commission will 
    frequently provide its preliminary assessment verbally, following up 
    later with a written view. Ensuring that interested persons have an 
    opportunity to review all proposals--and responding to each concern as 
    occurs in most rulemakings--would preclude timely preparation and 
    submission of views to the Secretary of State.
        Fourth, given the compressed timetable under which 39 U.S.C. 407(c) 
    functions occur, waiting until 30 days after publication in the Federal 
    Register would in many cases mean that the Secretary of State could not 
    rely on the Commission's views until well after a U.S. position had 
    been developed and the proposals are deliberated at the UPU. See 5 
    U.S.C. 553(d)(3). For these reasons, the foreign affairs exemption 
    would apply if views were found to be rules within the meaning of the 
    APA.
    
    C. Section 3017.1(a)--Definition of Modern Rate Regulation
    
        Proposed rule. Proposed Sec.  3017.1(a) defines modern rate 
    regulation as the standards and criteria the Commission has established 
    pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3622.
        Commenters' positions. The Postal Service proposes that the 
    definition of modern rate regulation be amended to ``the standards and 
    criteria that the Commission has established in [39 CFR part 3010] with 
    respect to rates and part 3020 with respect to classification pursuant 
    to its authority in [39 U.S.C. 3622].'' Postal Service Comments at 9. 
    The Postal Service observes that the definition in the proposed rules 
    is identical to the statutory language of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). Id. 
    However, it contends that this definition, if interpreted as it has 
    been in the past, not only deviates from the Commission's statutory 
    authority, but may result in confusion for members of the public and 
    unnecessary work for those submitting comments. Id. at 2. It urges the 
    Commission to clarify the definition to ensure comments do not exceed 
    the scope of the Commission's views as delineated by 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1). Id.
        The Postal Service notes that in Docket No. PI2012-1, the 
    Commission solicited comments on the principles that should guide 
    development of its views on the consistency of proposals with the 
    standards and criteria of 39 U.S.C. 3622. Id. at 6. It asserts that 
    this solicitation, while closely related to the statute, exceeded the 
    scope of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) and resulted in comments focused on the 
    objectives and factors of 39 U.S.C. 3622 rather than the standards and 
    criteria established by the Commission. Id. at 7. The Postal Service 
    contends that its proposed definition of modern rate regulation 
    unambiguously identifies the standards and criteria established by the 
    Commission as being found in part 3010 for UPU proposals related to 
    rates and in part 3020 for UPU proposals related to classifications, 
    and points commenters to the relevant regulations on which the 
    Commission will base its view to the Secretary of State. Id. at 9-10.
        The Postal Service suggests that changes in these rates might be 
    analogized to a Type 1 rate adjustment and proposes that the standards 
    for Type 1 rate adjustments in 39 CFR 3010.11(d) be applied to UPU 
    proposals. Id. at 5. The Postal Service also notes that part 3020 
    establishes the rules for Postal Service products and the 
    classification of those products. Id. With respect to the Commission 
    review process of UPU proposals, however, it states that part 3020 is 
    rarely applicable because UPU proposals reviewed by the Commission 
    rarely relate to classification changes for market dominant products. 
    Id. Thus, the Postal Service asserts that the Commission usually does 
    not need to consider the standards and criteria in part 3020 when 
    issuing its views to the Secretary of State. Id.
        UPS asserts that the Postal Service's proposed definition of modern 
    rate regulation is inconsistent with 39 U.S.C. 407(c) and urges the 
    Commission to reject it. Corrected UPS Reply Comments at 1. UPS 
    observes that the issues raised by UPU proposals extend beyond the 
    legality of terminal dues rates. Id. at 4. It asserts that the 
    Commission must also consider other UPU proposals in light of, for 
    example, the objective of 39 U.S.C. 3622(b)(7) to enhance mail security 
    and deter terrorism. Id.
        UPS also contends the Postal Service's proposal is at odds with how 
    the Postal Service interpreted the Commission's authority in 2012, when 
    the Postal Service stated that under section 407(c), the Commission is 
    tasked with providing its view on whether proposals are consistent with 
    the 39 U.S.C. 3622 objectives and factors. Id. at 10 n.7.
        UPS asserts that when the Commission considers the objectives and 
    factors of 39 U.S.C. 3622 in evaluating UPU proposals, it is giving 
    heed to the statutory language of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). Id. at 10. UPS 
    contends that any standard or criterion established by the Commission 
    ``under'' section 3622 must be consistent with section 3622 because 
    agencies'
    
    [[Page 874]]
    
    jurisdiction and substantive powers are limited by statute, and they 
    can only act in conformance with their statutory mandate. Id.
        UPS also states that having empowered and required the Commission 
    to craft regulations in conformance with section 3622, it is 
    implausible that Congress would require that the Commission ignore 
    section 3622 when evaluating UPU proposals. Id. at 11. It states that 
    agencies must always consider their governing statutes when taking any 
    action and must ensure that their actions are consistent with those 
    statutes. Id. UPS contends that at a minimum, 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) 
    should not be read as preventing the Commission from considering the 
    objectives and factors of 39 U.S.C. 3622. Id. UPS asserts that 39 
    U.S.C. 407(c)(1) is most sensibly read as affirmatively encouraging the 
    Commission to consider the objectives and factors. Id.
        FedEx agrees, in principle, with the Postal Service's assertion 
    that the Commission's approach to reviewing proposed UPU rates and 
    classifications for market dominant products should closely parallel 
    the agency's review of rates and classifications for market dominant 
    domestic products, but disagrees with the Postal Service on the 
    implications of this observation for the proposed rules. FedEx Reply 
    Comments at 1. FedEx disagrees with the Postal Service's conclusion 
    that 39 CFR parts 3010 and 3020 prohibit commenters and the Commission 
    from considering the consistency of relevant UPU proposals with title 
    39 requirements other than those explicitly mentioned in 39 CFR parts 
    3010 and 3020. Id. at 3. It observes, for example, that 39 CFR 
    3010.11(c) provides that public comments may address other relevant 
    statutory provisions and applicable Commission orders and directives. 
    Id. Moreover, FedEx notes that the Postal Service's position that 39 
    CFR parts 3010 and 3020 constrain the Commission's review rests on the 
    assumption that UPU rates are considered a Type 1 rate adjustments, an 
    issue that the Commission has not decided. Id.
        FedEx asserts that given the intense reconsideration of product 
    definitions now underway at the UPU, it is hardly self-evident that the 
    rates and classifications that will be proposed for consideration at 
    the next UPU Congress should be considered analogous to Type 1 rate 
    adjustments. Id. It also argues that the international nature of UPU 
    rates necessarily requires the Commission to consider some elements of 
    title 39 that are not involved in a review of domestic rates and 
    classifications. Id.
        Commission analysis. The Commission declines to adopt the revision 
    proposed by the Postal Service. The Commission concludes that the 
    definition as originally proposed, which defines modern rate regulation 
    in terms ``identical to the statutory language of [39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1)],'' is appropriate. See Postal Service Comments at 9. In 
    addition to being consistent with the statute, the definition is also 
    consistent with the Commission's past practices with respect to 
    providing its views to the Secretary of State on the consistency of 
    such rate or classification with modern rate setting criteria.\16\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \16\ See e.g., Order No. 2602 at 1-2; Docket No. PI2012-1, 
    Comments of the United States Postal Service, August 27, 2012, at 2-
    4.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The Postal Service's proposed modification would also artificially 
    detach the Commission's views from the underlying objectives and 
    factors of modern rate regulation, which are the basis of the 
    ``standards and criteria established by the Commission under section 
    3622.'' 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). Moreover, the Postal Service's proposed 
    analogy to Type 1 rate cases seemingly conflicts with its comments in 
    light of the fact that sections in 39 CFR part 3010 request expansive 
    comments (i.e., 39 CFR 3010.11(c)) and explicitly refer to the 
    objectives and factors enumerated in 39 U.S.C. 3622 (i.e., 39 CFR 
    3010.12(b)(7) and (8)). Furthermore, the Postal Service's suggestion to 
    restrict the definition to 39 CFR parts 3010 and 3020 is too limiting. 
    For example, the Commission's authority to regulate service performance 
    standards was also drawn from 39 U.S.C. 3622. See 39 CFR part 3055. 
    Consequently, the Commission declines to adopt the Postal Service's 
    proposed modification and adopts the proposed paragraph (a) as a final 
    rule, without change.
    
    D. Section 3017.1(b)--Definition of Views
    
        Proposed rule. Proposed Sec.  3017.1(b) defines views as the 
    opinion the Commission provides to the Secretary of State in the 
    context of certain UPU proceedings on the consistency of a proposal 
    affecting a market dominant rate or classification with modern rate 
    regulation.
        Commenters' positions. FedEx and the Public Representative suggest 
    revisions to the definition of views. FedEx asserts that the definition 
    should correspond to the scope of the Commission's obligations under 
    section 407(c)(1), and should not be limited only to the opinion the 
    Commission provides to the Secretary of State in the context of certain 
    UPU proceedings. FedEx Comments at 12-13. Instead, FedEx contends that 
    the definition should encompass each opinion the Commission is obliged 
    to provide to the Secretary of State before a treaty, convention, or 
    amendment that establishes a rate or classification for a product 
    subject to subchapter I of chapter 36 is concluded. Id. FedEx asserts 
    that section 407(c)(1) applies to all rates and classifications for 
    international market dominant products established by the Secretary of 
    State by intergovernmental agreement. Id. at 13.
        In response, the Public Representative asserts that FedEx's 
    proposed revision is unnecessary. PR Reply Comments at 6. She 
    nonetheless states that the proposed rules may benefit from clarifying 
    that part 3017 does not preclude the Commission from initiating a 
    docket and soliciting comments on a relevant non-UPU treaty, 
    convention, or amendment. Id. at 6-7.
        The Public Representative also recommends, in conjunction with a 
    suggestion to add a definition of relevant proposal, that the proposed 
    definition of views be limited to opinions on ``relevant proposals.'' 
    PR Comments at 6-7. She notes that the proposed rules indicate that the 
    Commission will provide views on proposals that affect a market 
    dominant rate or classification but would not exclude proposals that 
    are unable to be assessed because they are for future rates or 
    classifications and lack the detail needed to make an assessment, or 
    proposals that were rejected or withdrawn. Id. at 7. The Public 
    Representative recommends that the Commission amend Sec.  3017.1 to 
    limit views to relevant proposals and then offer a separate definition 
    of relevant proposal in Sec.  3017.1. Id. at 7; Attachment 1 at 1.
        Commission analysis. FedEx proposes to define views as opinions the 
    Commission provides to the Secretary of State before the Secretary of 
    State concludes any treaty, convention, or amendment that establishes a 
    rate or classification for a product subject to subchapter I of chapter 
    36. This accurately reflects the language of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1). 
    However, each applicable ``treaty, convention, or amendment'' since the 
    PAEA was enacted has occurred in the context of certain UPU 
    proceedings. It appears that the two suggested approaches have 
    identical practical effects and that tying each docket to a specific 
    UPU Congress will allow interested persons to more easily track 
    relevant proposed changes. As a result, the Commission adjusts the 
    definition of views in Sec.  3017.1 to accommodate the scope of the 
    statute as
    
    [[Page 875]]
    
    discussed above. Part 3017 is not intended to preclude the Commission 
    from establishing a docket, accepting comments, or giving views in non-
    UPU contexts that meet the requirements of 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1).
        The Commission also concludes that the proposals on which it 
    provides its views do not require clarification. According to the 
    proposed definition, the Commission only gives views on ``. . . the 
    consistency of a proposal affecting a market dominant rate or 
    classification with modern rate regulation.'' The requirement that the 
    proposal affect a market dominant rate or classification excludes 
    proposals that will not have an effect because they have been withdrawn 
    or rejected, as well as proposals with effects unable to be assessed 
    because they lack the requisite detail to make an assessment. 
    Consequently, except for the changes in the definition section as 
    explained above, the Commission adopts the proposed rule as a final 
    rule without any additional changes relating to the comments regarding 
    proposals.
    
    E. Section 3017.2--Purpose
    
        Proposed rule. The proposed rule states that the proposed part 
    3017's purpose is to facilitate public participation in, and promote 
    the transparency of, the development of Commission views.
        Commenters' positions. No commenter specifically addresses this 
    proposed rule.
        Commission analysis. The Commission has reviewed this section and 
    concludes that it accurately describes the purpose of the rules. 
    Consequently, it adopts the proposed rule as a final rule, without 
    change.
    
    F. Section 3017.3--Establishment and Scope of Docket
    
        Proposed Sec.  3017.3 consists of three paragraphs. As proposed, 
    paragraph (a) establishes the target date for establishing a public 
    inquiry docket as on or about 150 days before a UPU Congress convenes, 
    and states that the Commission will solicit comments on the general 
    principles that should guide the Commission's development of views on 
    relevant proposals, in a general way, and, if available, on specific 
    relevant proposals. Proposed paragraph (b) states that the public 
    inquiry docket established pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section 
    may also encompass matters related to development of the Commission's 
    views, such as the availability of relevant proposals, the views, other 
    documents, and related actions. Proposed paragraph (c) provides that 
    the notice establishing each public inquiry docket will be published in 
    the Federal Register.
    1. Scope of the Docket
        Commenters' positions. FedEx seeks expansion of the scope of the 
    public inquiry docket to include all international agreements that 
    impact rates or classifications of market dominant products. FedEx 
    Comments at 13. It asserts that the wording of paragraph (a) suggests 
    that the Commission can limit its views to a high level review of 
    proposed rates and classifications; however, it contends that 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1) clearly requires the Commission to consider carefully all of 
    the criteria set out in 39 U.S.C. 3622. Id. FedEx also asserts that the 
    Commission cannot fail to provide views on relevant proposals merely 
    because they are not available on or about 150 days before a UPU 
    Congress convenes. Id. It further asserts that the Commission is 
    obliged by 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) to develop views on specific proposals 
    as they become available. Id.
        The Postal Service characterizes FedEx's position as ``directly 
    counter to the plain reading of section 407(c)(1).'' Postal Service 
    Reply Comments at 5. It notes that FedEx uses the word ``agreement,'' 
    which is different and distinct from what is set forth in the statute. 
    Id. The Postal Service asserts that 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) requires the 
    Secretary of State to seek the Commission's view prior to concluding 
    any treaty, convention, amendment. Id. at 5-6. The Postal Service 
    asserts that these terms are distinct from an ``agreement'' as 
    interpreted by FedEx, and that the Commission has properly focused the 
    proposed rules on issues governed by the UPU Congress. Id. at 6. The 
    Postal Service further asserts that 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) ``only applies 
    to decisions taken by the United States, [through] the Secretary of 
    State, at the UPU Congress, and thus the Commission need not create a 
    procedure for public solicitation of comments for every UPU proposal at 
    meetings between UPU Congresses.'' Id.
        In response to FedEx, the Public Representative notes that proposed 
    Sec.  3017.3 can be interpreted as providing a docket for each UPU 
    Congress, including the relevant proposals for UPU meetings following 
    that Congress but prior to the next Congress. PR Reply Comments at 7. 
    She nonetheless does not object to a clarification of the rule. Id. The 
    Public Representative also responds to FedEx's statement that proposed 
    Sec.  3017.3(a) suggests that the Commission can limit its views to a 
    high level review. Id. She argues that the language from the proposed 
    rule that FedEx applies to views was intended to apply to commenters. 
    It was also intended to allow comments on both specific proposals and 
    general principles that can be applied to various proposals or in cases 
    where specific proposals are unavailable. Id. at 7-8. The Public 
    Representative concludes that she supports Sec.  3017.3 as proposed. 
    Id. at 8.
        Commission analysis. FedEx highlights a need to revise the wording 
    of Sec.  3017.3 to clarify that it is the solicitation of comments that 
    may be limited due to the Commission's inability to make proposals 
    available. FedEx Comments at 13. The Commission intends for Sec.  
    3017.3(a) to allow for comments to cover both approaches and principles 
    that pertain to the proposals generally as well as specific proposals 
    when the Commission is able to make these available.
        FedEx also is concerned the proposed rules are too narrowly 
    tailored to UPU Congresses. Id. at 13. As noted in Order No. 2602, each 
    docket will cover a UPU Congress and related meetings. Order No. 2602 
    at 2-3. To further clarify its intent in the proposed regulations, the 
    Commission will insert into section 3017.3 the phrase, ``or such 
    advance time as the Commission determines for any other 39 U.S.C. 
    407(c)(1) matter.'' The Commission adopts the proposed Sec.  3017.3 as 
    a final rule, with clarifications outlined above concerning the scope 
    of comments and revisions to reflect the intention to use the IM 
    designation.
    2. Availability of Proposals
        Commenters' positions. The Public Representative suggests that the 
    Commission make every effort to provide the text or a detailed summary 
    of the relevant proposals to the public. PR Comments at 3. She believes 
    this will facilitate discussion by providing potential commenters with 
    a lexicon of terms and titles for use in referencing specific proposals 
    and with better information about the scope of issues in each docket. 
    See generally PR Comments at 3-5. By not providing proposals, the 
    Public Representative is concerned the public is segregated into those 
    who have independent knowledge of proposals and those who do not. Id. 
    at 5. The Public Representative acknowledges that circumstances may 
    prevent the Commission from providing text or summaries of all 
    proposals, but nonetheless asserts that the Commission should provide 
    information regarding specific proposals in advance. Id. at 6. UPS 
    supports this suggestion, and further supports any and all efforts by
    
    [[Page 876]]
    
    the Commission to provide as much information as soon as possible. 
    Corrected UPS Reply Comments at 6. It asserts that ``[o]therwise, any 
    discussion of the proposals would likely lack meaningful impact.'' Id.
        The Postal Service observes that UPU proposals generally are not 
    publicly available documents, and states that the Commission should not 
    release documents that are not publicly available. Postal Service Reply 
    Comments at 2. In addition, the Postal Service contests the Public 
    Representative's contention that absent the Commission's provision of 
    the proposals, the public is not in a position to provide meaningful 
    feedback. Id. The Postal Service states that the ability to provide 
    comments on how the Commission should undertake its statutory role is 
    not dependent on access to specific proposals. Id. It states that the 
    prior public inquiry docket shows that the public can comment on broad 
    policy objectives and principles. Id.
        The Postal Service also asserts that comments on specific proposals 
    ``will significantly burden the commenters and the Commission without 
    providing the overarching opinions of the commenters that are most 
    beneficial to the Commission in developing its views.'' Id. In 
    addition, the Postal Service states that the proposed rule 3017.3(a) 
    already sets forth that when a specific proposal is relevant and deemed 
    significant to assist in developing the Commission's view, the 
    Commission will seek comments on that specific proposal. Id. The Postal 
    Service asserts that the proposed rules appropriately seek general 
    comments on relevant proposals that impact market dominant rates and 
    classifications and specific proposals when determined necessary. Id. 
    at 2-3.
        Commission analysis. The Commission appreciates commenters' 
    interest in access to specific proposals. The Commission is neither the 
    originator nor the official custodian of these documents and as such, 
    it is not in a position to guarantee their availability. As commenters 
    also acknowledge, the proposals are not usually publicly available. 
    However, the rule expresses the Commission's intent to solicit comments 
    on specific proposals if it can make them available.
        In addition, the Commission found comments on the general 
    principles that should guide the Commission's development of views 
    useful and informative in Docket No. PI2012-1. The inclusion of a 
    reference to specific proposals in the proposed set of rules does not 
    diminish the importance the Commission places on receiving general 
    comments concerning suggested principles and approaches.
    
    G. Section 3017.4--Comment Deadline(s)
    
        Proposed rule. Proposed Sec.  3017.4 consists of two paragraphs. 
    Proposed paragraph (a) provides that the deadline for public comments 
    will be established consistent with the Commission's assessment of its 
    ability to file timely views with the Secretary of State. Proposed 
    Sec.  3017.4(b) employs the same standard for suspending or foregoing 
    solicitation of public comments if receiving comments would impede the 
    Commission's ability to provide timely submission of views to the 
    Secretary of State.
    1. Suspending or Foregoing Solicitation of Public Comments
        Commenters' positions. FedEx, consistent with its position on the 
    applicability of APA notice and comment requirements to a part 3017 
    docket, suggests that provisions for deadlines and abbreviated 
    procedures should conform to 5 U.S.C. 553. FedEx Comments at 14. FedEx 
    does not consider timely submission of the Commission views to the 
    Secretary of State an adequate justification for curtailing or 
    eliminating notice and comment procedures required by the APA. Id.
        Joyce Dillard states comments should not be suspended or foregone 
    because ``all public comment should be welcomed on any United States 
    treaty, convention, amendment, or any other transactions.'' Dillard 
    Comments at 1. She also states that privatization of the government 
    should not be the Commission's objective. Id. She further asserts that 
    the public needs a voice and representation. Id.
        FedEx agrees with Joyce Dillard's position on the public's need for 
    a voice and representation. FedEx Reply Comments at 4. However, it 
    suggests that Joyce Dillard's implication that the proposed procedures 
    also imply the Commission's intent to foster privatization of the 
    government may be due to a misunderstanding of the Commission's notice. 
    Id. at 4-5. The Postal Service opposes Joyce Dillard's suggestions, 
    arguing that ``the Commission should maintain the ability to forego 
    solicitation of comments when necessary, especially when the submission 
    of the Commission's views to the Secretary of State would otherwise be 
    delayed.'' Postal Service Reply Comments at 6-7.
        The Public Representative states that circumstances may require 
    suspending or foregoing comments in order to allow the Commission to 
    provide views to the Secretary of State in a timely manner.\17\ She 
    opposes FedEx's approach because it ``would negatively impact the 
    United States' ability to negotiate and conclude international 
    agreements.'' PR Reply Comments at 6. However, she suggests including a 
    requirement for issuance of a notice of suspension as new Sec.  
    3017.4(b)(1). PR Comments at 9-10; id. Attachment 1 at 2.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \17\ PR Comments at 9-10; PR Reply Comments at 5.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Commission analysis. As explained in section IV.B supra, the 
    requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553 are inapplicable to Commission views. 
    Although the APA notice and comment requirements do not apply, the 
    Commission shares the commenters' interests in having procedures that 
    enhance opportunities for public participation and has crafted part 
    3017 for that reason. At the same time, Docket No. PI2012-1 
    demonstrated for the Commission that providing an opportunity for input 
    must be balanced with the Commission's primary statutory responsibility 
    under 39 U.S.C. 407--the timely submission of its views to the 
    Secretary of State. The Commission concludes that the standard for 
    suspending and foregoing comments that appears in proposed Sec.  
    3017.4(b) appropriately balances an opportunity for comment with the 
    Commission's statutory responsibility. The Commission will endeavor to 
    keep commenters informed when comments are suspended. Nonetheless, the 
    Commission declines to adopt the Public Representative's suggestion of 
    the issuance of a formal notice of suspension (or of foregoing) 
    solicitation of comments on grounds that a formal requirement may 
    reduce the Commission's ability to file timely comments with the 
    Secretary of State.
        The Commission adopts proposed Sec.  3017.4 as a final rule, with 
    minor editorial revisions to reflect the intention to use the IM 
    designation and the replacement of ``public comment'' with ``comment.''
    2. Absence of Provision for Reply Comments
        The Public Representative acknowledges that the Commission has 
    explained that it is not initiating reply comments due to time 
    constraints, but reads the proposed rules to allow interested parties 
    the opportunity to submit reply comments at the Commission's 
    discretion. PR Comments at 7-8. She encourages the Commission to 
    provide interested parties an opportunity to submit reply comments
    
    [[Page 877]]
    
    if time permits and suggests incorporating reply comments into Sec.  
    3017.4. Id. at 8; Attachment 1 at 2. She also suggests that the 
    Commission provide advance notice of the opportunity to file reply 
    comments as she believes this will facilitate timely public 
    participation. Id. at 9; Attachment 1 at 2.
        UPS agrees with the Public Representative's suggestion with respect 
    to providing for reply comments. Corrected UPS Reply Comments at 8. 
    UPS's rationale is that reply comments are valuable because they allow 
    parties to point out flaws in other parties' initial comments. UPS 
    states that reply comments should expedite rather than delay 
    development of the Commission's views. Id.
        The Postal Service contends that reply comments are unnecessary and 
    would delay the proceedings. Postal Service Reply Comments at 3. It 
    asserts that in the past, the Commission specifically set forth the 
    policies and scope of the comments it was soliciting from the public, 
    resulting in ample opportunity to develop and submit comments. Id. The 
    Postal Service further asserts that the proposed dockets are not 
    adversarial proceedings requiring counter arguments and that a single 
    round of comments is sufficient to allow commenters to provide their 
    own views to the Commission. Id.
        Commission analysis. As the Public Representative and the Postal 
    Service note, the Commission did not originally include an opportunity 
    to file reply comments when it established Docket No. P2012-1. However, 
    the Commission subsequently granted a request to file reply comments, 
    but due to the timetable concluded that it could only allow 3 days for 
    reply comments.\18\ The limited time for reply comments allowed in 
    Docket No. PI2012-1 strained the Commission's preparation of views and, 
    as the Public Representative observes, the limited time also may not 
    have provided all commenters with adequate time to review the initial 
    comments and file responses.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \18\ Docket No. PI2012-1, Order No. 1451, Order Allowing for 
    Reply Comments, August 28, 2012.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The Commission appreciates that reply comments may provide 
    additional useful insights; however, as the Postal Service observes, 
    the purpose of a part 3017 docket is not to facilitate an adversarial 
    proceeding, but rather to provide an opportunity for commenters to 
    provide input on how the views should be developed. This can be 
    accomplished without reply comments. As such, the Commission does not 
    plan to provide an opportunity for reply comments in the ordinary 
    course of a part 3017 docket.
    
    H. Section 3017.5--Commission Discretion
    
        Proposed rule. Proposed rule 3017.5 states that the Commission will 
    review timely filed comments prior to submitting its views to the 
    Secretary of State.
        Commenter's position. FedEx asserts that proposed Sec.  3017.5 
    overstates the Commission's discretion. FedEx Comments at 14. It 
    asserts that the Commission's discretion with respect to its review of 
    comments is limited by the APA and principles of administrative law and 
    draws an analogy to the Commission's review of domestic rates. Id. 
    FedEx suggests that proposed Sec.  3017.5 be deleted. Id.
        Commission analysis. As explained in section IV.B supra, Commission 
    views are not subject to the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 553. As such, the 
    Commission is not required to follow the APA's notice and comment 
    requirements prior to submitting its views. Despite no legal 
    requirement that it do so, the Commission is creating a new part 3017 
    to allow for increased public input and transparency into the 
    development of its views pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 407(c). Proposed Sec.  
    3017.5 is intended to place the public on notice that comments 
    submitted in response to a part 3017 solicitation will be reviewed by 
    the Commission, and that the review will be limited to timely filed 
    comments. Limiting review to timely filed comments is consistent with 
    the necessity that an opportunity to provide comments in a part 3017 
    docket does not hinder the Commission's ability to submit its views to 
    the Secretary of State in a timely manner. However, the Commission 
    concludes that it would be useful to clarify that comments must not 
    only be timely filed, but filed in response to a Commission 
    solicitation under this part.
        The Commission adopts proposed Sec.  3017.5 as a final rule, with 
    minor revisions to the caption and text for clarity.
    
    I. Publication of Views in the Federal Register
    
        Commenter's position. UPS proposes that the Commission publish its 
    views in the Federal Register when the views are sent to the Department 
    of State. Corrected UPS Reply Comments at 6. It asserts that publishing 
    the Commission's views engenders greater public confidence that the 
    objectives of 39 U.S.C. 3622 and 39 U.S.C. 407 are being followed, 
    increases transparency, and encourages participation in part 3017 
    dockets. Id. at 7-8.
        Commission analysis. As indicated in Sec.  3017.3(b), the 
    Commission intends to post its views in the docket with which it is 
    associated after conclusion of deliberations on a related treaty, 
    convention, or amendment. The Commission believes that posting its 
    views on the agency Web site will address UPS's concerns.
    
    V. Ordering Paragraphs
    
        It is ordered:
        1. The Commission adopts 39 CFR part 3017 as a final rule, 
    effective 30 days following publication in the Federal Register.
        2. The Secretary shall arrange for publication of this Order in the 
    Federal Register.
    
    List of Subjects in 39 CFR Part 3017
    
        Administrative practice and procedure, International agreements, 
    Postal Service.
    
    
    0
    For the reasons discussed in the preamble, the Commission amends 
    chapter III of title 39 of the Code of Federal Regulations by adding 
    part 3017 to read as follows:
    
    PART 3017--PROCEDURES RELATED TO COMMISSION VIEWS
    
    Sec.
    3017.1 Definitions in this part.
    3017.2 Purpose.
    3017.3 Establishment and scope of docket.
    3017.4 Comment deadline(s).
    3017.5 Commission discretion as to treatment of comments.
    
        Authority:  39 U.S.C. 407; 503.
    
    
    Sec.  3017.1  Definitions in this part.
    
        (a) Modern rate regulation refers to the standards and criteria the 
    Commission has established pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3622.
        (b) Views refers to the opinion the Commission provides to the 
    Secretary of State pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 407(c)(1) on the consistency 
    with modern rate regulation of a proposed treaty, convention, or 
    amendment that establishes a market dominant rate or classification.
    
    
    Sec.  3017.2  Purpose.
    
        The rules in this part are intended to facilitate public 
    participation in, and promote the transparency of, the development of 
    Commission views.
    
    
    Sec.  3017.3  Establishment and scope of docket.
    
        (a) On or about 150 days before a Universal Postal Union Congress 
    convenes or such advance time as the Commission determines for any 
    other 39
    
    [[Page 878]]
    
    U.S.C. 407(c)(1) matter, the Commission will establish a docket to 
    solicit comments on the general principles that should guide the 
    Commission's development of views on relevant proposals, in a general 
    way, and on specific relevant proposals, if the Commission is able to 
    make these available.
        (b) The docket established pursuant to paragraph (a) of this 
    section may also include matters related to development of the 
    Commission's views, such as the availability of relevant proposals, 
    Commission views, other documents, or related actions.
        (c) The Commission shall arrange for publication in the Federal 
    Register of the notice establishing each docket authorized under this 
    part.
    
    
    Sec.  3017.4  Comment deadline(s).
    
        (a) The Commission shall establish a deadline for comments upon 
    establishment of the docket that is consistent with timely submission 
    of the Commission's views to the Secretary of State. The Commission may 
    establish other deadlines for comments as appropriate.
        (b) The Commission may suspend or forego solicitation of comments 
    if it determines that such solicitation is not consistent with timely 
    submission of Commission views to the Secretary of State.
    
    
    Sec.  3017.5  Commission discretion as to treatment of comments.
    
        The Commission will review timely filed comments responding to a 
    Commission solicitation under this part prior to submitting its views 
    to the Secretary of State.
    
        By the Commission.
    Stacy L. Ruble,
    Secretary.
    [FR Doc. 2016-36 Filed 1-7-16; 8:45 am]
     BILLING CODE 7710-FW-P
    
    
    

