
    [Federal Register Volume 81, Number 3 (Wednesday, January 6, 2016)]
    [Rules and Regulations]
    [Pages 382-396]
    From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [[www.gpo.gov](http://www.gpo.gov)]
    [FR Doc No: 2015-33181]
    
    
    =======================================================================
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
    
    Office of the Secretary
    
    45 CFR Part 164
    
    
    Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
    Privacy Rule and the National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
    (NICS)
    
    AGENCY: Office for Civil Rights, Department of Health and Human 
    Services.
    
    ACTION: Final rule.
    
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    SUMMARY: The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS or ``the 
    Department'') is issuing this final rule to modify the Health Insurance 
    Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule to 
    expressly permit certain HIPAA covered entities to disclose to the 
    National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) the identities 
    of individuals who are subject to a Federal ``mental health 
    prohibitor'' that disqualifies them from shipping, transporting, 
    possessing, or receiving a firearm. The NICS is a national system 
    maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to conduct 
    background checks on persons who may be disqualified from receiving 
    firearms based on Federally prohibited categories or State law. Among 
    the persons subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor established 
    under the Gun Control Act of 1968 and implementing regulations issued 
    by the Department of Justice (DOJ) are individuals who have been 
    involuntarily committed to a mental institution; found incompetent to 
    stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity; or otherwise have been 
    determined by a court, board, commission, or other lawful authority to 
    be a danger to themselves or others or to lack the mental capacity to 
    contract or manage their own affairs, as a result of marked subnormal 
    intelligence or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or disease. 
    Under this final rule, only covered entities with lawful authority to 
    make the adjudications or commitment decisions that make individuals 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, or that serve as 
    repositories of information for NICS reporting purposes, are permitted 
    to disclose the information needed for these purposes. The disclosure 
    is restricted to limited demographic and certain other information 
    needed for NICS purposes. The rule specifically prohibits the 
    disclosure of diagnostic or clinical information, from medical records 
    or other sources, and any mental health information beyond the 
    indication that the individual is subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor.
    
    DATES: Effective date: This final rule is effective on February 5, 
    2016.
    
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Andra Wicks, 202-205-2292.
    
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
    
    I. Background
    
        On January 16, 2013, President Barack Obama announced 23 executive 
    actions aimed at curbing gun violence across the nation. Those actions 
    include efforts by the Federal government to strengthen the national 
    background check system, and a specific commitment to ``[a]ddress 
    unnecessary legal barriers, particularly relating to the Health 
    Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, that may prevent States 
    from making information available to the background check system.'' The 
    National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) is the system 
    used to determine whether a potential firearms recipient is statutorily 
    prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm. The Department 
    proposed, and now finalizes, a modification to the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
    to permit certain covered entities to disclose to the NICS the 
    identities of persons who are not allowed to possess or receive a 
    firearm because they are subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor.
    
    The National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
    
        The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993, Public Law 103-
    159 (Brady Gun Law), and its implementing regulations, are designed to 
    prevent the transfer of firearms by licensed dealers to individuals who 
    are not allowed to possess or receive them as a result of restrictions 
    contained in either the Gun Control Act of 1968, as amended (Title 18, 
    United States Code, Chapter 44), or State law. The Gun Control Act 
    identifies several categories (known as ``prohibitors'') of individuals 
    \1\ who are prohibited from engaging in the shipment, transport, 
    receipt, or possession of firearms, including convicted felons and 
    fugitives. Most relevant for the purposes of this rule is the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor, which, pursuant to Department of Justice 
    (DOJ) regulations, applies to individuals who have been involuntarily 
    committed to a mental institution, for reasons such as mental illness 
    or drug use; \2\ found incompetent to stand trial or not guilty by 
    reason of insanity; or otherwise determined by a court, board, 
    commission, or other lawful authority to be a danger to themselves or 
    others or unable to manage their own affairs, as a result of marked 
    subnormal intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or 
    disease.3 4
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \1\ See 18 U.S.C. 922(g) and (n) and implementing regulations at 
    27 CFR 478.11 and 27 CFR 478.32.
        \2\ The regulation, at 27 CFR 478.11, defines ``Committed to a 
    mental institution'' as a formal commitment to the institution by a 
    court or other lawful authority. The term does not apply to a person 
    voluntarily admitted to a mental institution or in a mental 
    institution merely for observation.
        \3\ The term used in the statute is ``adjudicated as a mental 
    defective. The term includes a finding of insanity in a criminal 
    case, and a finding of incompetence to stand trial or a finding of 
    not guilty by reason of lack of mental responsibility pursuant to 
    the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 27 CFR 478.11.
        \4\ This rule refers to the involuntary commitments and other 
    applicable adjudications as, collectively, ``adjudications that make 
    an individual subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor.''
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The Brady Gun Law established the NICS to help enforce these 
    prohibitions, as well as State law prohibitions on the possession or 
    receipt of firearms.\5\ The NICS Index, a database administered by the 
    Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), collects and maintains certain 
    identifying information about individuals who are subject to one or 
    more Federal prohibitors and thus who are ineligible to purchase 
    firearms. As of 2012, the NICS Index also contains information on 
    persons who are subject to State law prohibitions on the possession or 
    receipt of firearms.\6\ The
    
    [[Page 383]]
    
    minimum information required in a NICS Index record consists of: The 
    name of the ineligible individual; the date of birth; sex; and codes 
    indicating the applicable prohibitor, the submitting entity, and the 
    agency record supporting the prohibition (e.g., an order for 
    involuntary commitment). For individuals subject to the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor, only the fact that the individual is subject to that 
    prohibitor is submitted to the NICS; underlying diagnoses, treatment 
    records, and other identifiable health information are not provided to 
    or maintained by the NICS. A NICS background check queries the NICS 
    Index and certain other national databases \7\ to determine whether a 
    prospective buyer's identifying information matches any prohibiting 
    records contained in the databases. The NICS Index can be accessed only 
    for the limited purposes authorized by regulation (see 28 CFR 25.6(j)) 
    and cannot be used for other purposes, including general law 
    enforcement activities.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \5\ See Public Law 103-159, 18 U.S.C. 921-925, and implementing 
    regulations at 28 CFR 25.1 through 25.11 (establishing NICS 
    information system specifications and processes) and 27 CFR part 478 
    (establishing requirements and prohibitions for commerce in firearms 
    and ammunition, including requirements related to conducting NICS 
    background checks); and 42 U.S.C. 3759(b) (allocating a percentage 
    of certain DOJ funds for State reporting of NICS data).
        \6\ See Statement Before the Senate Judiciary Committee, 
    Subcommittee on Crime and Terrorism at a hearing entitled, ``THE FIX 
    GUN CHECKS ACT: BETTER STATE AND FEDERAL COMPLIANCE, SMARTER 
    ENFORCEMENT'' (November 15, 2011), by David Cuthbertson, Assistant 
    Director, Criminal Justice Information Services Division, Federal 
    Bureau of Investigation. Testimony available at: <http://www.justice.gov/ola/testimony/112-1/11-15-11-fbi-cuthbertson-testimony-re-the-fix-gun-checks-act.pdf>. We note also that State law 
    may be more restrictive than Federal law in some cases.
        \7\ The other databases include the Interstate Identification 
    Index, which contains criminal history record information; and the 
    National Crime Information Center, which includes, e.g., information 
    on persons subject to civil protection orders and arrest warrants. 
    Additional information is available at, <http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/nics/general-information/nics-overview>.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The potential transfer of a firearm from a Federal Firearms 
    Licensee (FFL) to a prospective buyer proceeds as follows: First, the 
    prospective buyer is required to provide personal information on a 
    Firearms Transaction Record (ATF Form 4473). Unless the prospective 
    buyer has documentation that he or she qualifies for an exception to 
    the NICS background check requirement under 18 U.S.C. 922(t)(3),\8\ the 
    FFL contacts the NICS--electronically, by telephone, or through a State 
    level point of contact--and provides certain identifying information 
    about the prospective buyer from ATF Form 4473.\9\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \8\ These exceptions are listed in the Bureau of Alcohol, 
    Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) regulation at 27 CFR 
    478.102(d). For example, a NICS check would not be required where 
    the potential recipient of a firearm has presented a valid State 
    permit or license, provided conditions at 27 CFR 478.102(d)(1) are 
    met.
        \9\ The form collects the prospective buyer's name; demographic 
    information such as address, place and date of birth, gender, 
    citizenship, race and ethnicity; and ``yes'' or ``no'' answers to 
    questions about the person's criminal history and other potential 
    prohibitors. The form is available at <http://www.atf.gov/forms/download/atf-f-4473-1.pdf>.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        The FFL then receives a response that the prospective firearm 
    transfer may proceed or is delayed. The transfer is delayed if the 
    prospective buyer's information matches a record contained in one of 
    the databases reviewed. If there is a match, a NICS examiner reviews 
    the record to determine whether the information it contains is, in 
    fact, prohibiting, and then either: (1) If the record does not contain 
    prohibiting information, advises the FFL to proceed with the 
    transaction; (2) if the record does contain prohibiting information, 
    denies the transaction (due to ineligibility); or (3) if it is unclear 
    based solely on the existing information in the record whether it is 
    prohibiting, delays the transaction pending further research.\10\ The 
    NICS examiner does not disclose the reason for the determination to the 
    FFL (e.g., the FFL would not learn that the individual was ineligible 
    due to the Federal mental health prohibitor). In case of a delay, if 
    the NICS examiner does not provide a final instruction to the FFL 
    within three business days of the initial background check request, the 
    FFL may proceed with the transaction.\11\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \10\ For example, a ``delay'' response may mean that further 
    research is required because potentially prohibitive criteria exist, 
    but the matched records are incomplete, See Federal Bureau of 
    Investigation (FBI) Fact Sheet at: [www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/nice/general-information/fact-sheet](http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/nice/general-information/fact-sheet).
        \11\ Some States have waiting periods that also must be complied 
    with before a firearm may be transferred, regardless of whether a 
    proceed response from NICS is received by the FFL within three 
    business days.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Although FFLs are required in most cases to request a background 
    check through the NICS before transferring a firearm to a prospective 
    buyer,\12\ Federal law does not require State agencies to report to the 
    NICS the identities of individuals who are prohibited from purchasing 
    firearms under either Federal or State prohibitors, and not all States 
    report complete information to the NICS or the databases checked by it. 
    Following the shooting at Virginia Tech University in 2007, and other 
    tragedies involving the illegal use of firearms, Congress enacted the 
    NICS Improvement Amendments Act (NIAA) of 2007, Public Law 110-180. 
    Among other provisions, the NIAA requires Federal agencies to make 
    accessible to the NICS the identities of individuals known by the 
    agencies to be subject to one or more prohibitors, and it authorizes 
    incentive grants for States to provide such information when it is in 
    their possession.\13\ In addition, some States have enacted legislation 
    requiring the reporting of the identities of ineligible individuals to 
    databases accessible to the NICS or to a State level repository 
    responsible for submitting information to the relevant databases.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \12\ See 27 CFR 478.102. Exceptions to this requirement are 
    referenced in FN 8 above, and listed in the regulation at 27 CFR 
    478.102(d).
        \13\ Eligibility for these grants is limited to States that have 
    implemented a ``relief from disabilities'' program for individuals 
    who are prohibited from possessing or receiving firearms for mental 
    health reasons. Such programs must provide that a State court, 
    board, commission, or other lawful authority shall grant the relief 
    if, based on the circumstances regarding the disabilities and the 
    person's record and reputation, the person is not likely to pose a 
    danger to public safety, and granting the relief would not be 
    contrary to the public interest. See Public Law 110-180, Section 
    105.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        States generally report criminal history information to the other 
    relevant databases that are checked by the NICS; however, many States 
    continue to report little if any information concerning individuals 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor (or the other Federal 
    prohibitors) to the NICS Index.\14\ As a result, the NICS does not have 
    access to complete information about all individuals who are subject to 
    one or more of the Federal prohibited categories or who are prohibited 
    from possessing or receiving firearms under State law.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \14\ Federal law does not require States to submit reports to 
    any of the three databases (the NICS Index, the III, and NCIC) 
    accessed during a NICS Check.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    The HIPAA Privacy Rule and NICS Reporting
    
        The Privacy Rule, promulgated under the Health Insurance 
    Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), Title II, Subtitle 
    F--Administrative Simplification, Public Law 104-191, establishes 
    federal protections to ensure the privacy and security of protected 
    health information (PHI) and establishes an array of individual rights 
    with respect to one's own health information. HIPAA applies to covered 
    entities, which include health plans, health care clearinghouses, and 
    health care providers that conduct certain standard transactions (such 
    as billing insurance) electronically. HIPAA covered entities may only 
    use and disclose PHI with the individual's written authorization, or as 
    otherwise expressly permitted or required by the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
        The Privacy Rule seeks to balance individuals' privacy interests 
    with important public policy goals including public health and safety. 
    In doing so, the Privacy Rule allows, subject to certain conditions and 
    limitations, uses and disclosures of PHI without individuals' 
    authorization for certain law enforcement purposes, to avert a serious 
    threat to health or safety, and where required by State or other law, 
    among other purposes.\15\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \15\ See 45 CFR 164.512.
    
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    [[Page 384]]
    
        As stated above, individuals who are subject to the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor are ineligible to purchase a firearm because they 
    have been ``committed to a mental institution'' or ``adjudicated as a 
    mental defective.'' \16\ DOJ regulations define these categories to 
    include persons who have been involuntarily committed to a mental 
    institution for reasons such as mental illness or drug use; have been 
    found incompetent to stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity; 
    or otherwise have been determined by a court, board, commission, or 
    other lawful authority to be a danger to themselves or others or unable 
    to manage their own affairs, as a result of marked subnormal 
    intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or disease. 
    In many cases, these records are not subject to HIPAA. Records of 
    individuals adjudicated as incompetent to stand trial, or not guilty by 
    reason of insanity, originate with entities in the criminal justice 
    system, and these entities are not HIPAA covered entities. Likewise, 
    involuntary civil commitments usually are made by court order, and 
    thus, records of such formal commitments typically originate with 
    entities in the justice system. In addition, many adjudications 
    determining that individuals are a danger to themselves or others, or 
    are incapable of managing their own affairs, occur through a legal 
    process in the court system.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \16\ See 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(4).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        However, because of the variety of State laws, there may be State 
    agencies, boards, commissions, or other lawful authorities outside the 
    court system that are involved in some involuntary commitments or 
    mental health adjudications that make an individual subject to the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor. Moreover, we understand that some 
    States have designated repositories to collect and report to the NICS 
    the identities of individuals subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor. We believe that certain of these lawful authorities or 
    repositories also may be HIPAA covered entities (e.g., a State health 
    agency may be a covered entity).
        As we described in the NPRM, where the record of an involuntary 
    commitment or mental health adjudication originates with a HIPAA 
    covered entity, or the HIPAA covered entity is the State repository for 
    such records, there are two ways in which covered entities can 
    currently report to the NICS (without the individual's authorization). 
    First, a covered entity can disclose the relevant information to the 
    NICS where a State has enacted a law that requires (and does not merely 
    authorize) such reporting.\17\ Second, where a State has not enacted 
    such a law, a HIPAA covered entity that performs both health care and 
    non-health care functions (e.g., NICS reporting) could become a hybrid 
    entity under HIPAA so that the Privacy Rule applies only to its health 
    care functions. A covered entity can achieve hybrid entity status by 
    designating its health care components as separate from other 
    components, documenting the designation, and implementing policies and 
    procedures to prevent unauthorized access to PHI by the entity's non-
    covered components.\18\ Under these circumstances, the covered entity 
    can report prohibitor information through its non-HIPAA covered NICS 
    reporting unit without restriction under the Privacy Rule. These 
    provisions remain in effect and are not altered by the amendments to 
    the Privacy Rule that we issue today.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \17\ See 45 CFR 164.512(a). Note that disclosures for NICS 
    purposes would not fall under the Privacy Rule's provisions 
    permitting disclosures for law enforcement purposes (which apply to 
    specific law enforcement inquiries) or to avert a serious threat to 
    health or safety (which require an imminent threat of harm). See 45 
    CFR 164.512(f) and (j).
        \18\ See 45 CFR 164.103, 164.105; 67 FR 53182 (8/14/2002).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        However, despite these avenues for disclosure, many States still 
    were not reporting to the NICS essential information on persons 
    prohibited from possessing firearms for reasons related to mental 
    health; concerns were raised that the HIPAA Privacy Rule's restrictions 
    on covered entities' disclosures of PHI might be preventing certain 
    States from reporting the relevant information to the NICS.
        In addition, in July 2012, the U.S. Government Accountability 
    Office (GAO) reported to Congress on the results of a survey of six 
    States that it had assessed as part of a performance audit of the 
    progress made by DOJ and the States in implementing the NIAA.\19\ In 
    the report, the GAO wrote that ``officials from 3 of the 6 States we 
    reviewed said that the absence of explicit State-level statutory 
    authority to share mental health records was an impediment to making 
    such records available to NICS.'' \20\ The report also stated that, 
    although the number of records provided by the States to the NICS had 
    increased by 800 percent between 2004 and 2011, this increase was 
    largely due to efforts by only 12 States. The report raised the 
    possibility that States that do not report to the NICS the identities 
    of individuals who are prohibited from possessing firearms for reasons 
    related to mental health may experience challenges to reporting related 
    to the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \19\ See GAO-12-684, Gun Control: Sharing Promising Practices 
    and Assessing Incentives Could Better Position Justice to Assist 
    States in Providing Records for Background Checks.
        \20\ We note that the GAO Report uses the term ``mental health 
    records'' to refer to identifying information on individuals who are 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor. To avoid implying 
    that mental health records are collected by NICS, the Department 
    uses the terms ``identities,'' ``information,'' or ``data'' in place 
    of ``mental health records.'' GAO-12-684, p. 12.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    II. The ANPRM
    
    Background
    
        On April 23, 2013, the Department published an Advance Notice of 
    Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) requesting public input on these issues (78 
    FR 23872). The ANPRM explained that the Department was considering 
    creating an express permission in the HIPAA Privacy Rule for reporting 
    information relevant to the Federal mental health prohibitor to the 
    NICS by those HIPAA covered entities that (a) are responsible for the 
    involuntary commitments or other adjudications that make individuals 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, or (b) are designated 
    by a State to report to the NICS. In the ANPRM, the Department 
    indicated that such an amendment might produce clarity regarding the 
    Privacy Rule and help make it simpler for States to report the 
    identities of such individuals to the NICS.
        To inform our efforts to address any issues in this area, we 
    requested comments on a series of questions concerning the nature and 
    scope of the problem of underreporting and whether a modification to 
    the Privacy Rule would help address these issues. We also requested 
    comments on any implications of a modification to the Privacy Rule for 
    the mental health community or for the treatment of individuals, and 
    how the Department might address any unintended consequences of such a 
    modification. We received over 2,050 comments in response from 
    individuals, State agencies, health care providers, associations of 
    health care professionals, consumer advocacy groups, and other 
    stakeholders.
        A number of commenters supported creating an express permission as 
    a way to remove a potential barrier to an important and necessary 
    public safety measure, which could help keep firearms out of the hands 
    of individuals who should not have them by strengthening the background 
    check system. Many others generally expressed concern that the NICS, 
    the Federal mental health prohibitor, and
    
    [[Page 385]]
    
    the contemplated HIPAA permission would infringe on their Second 
    Amendment right to bear arms and the right to be afforded due process 
    of law under the U.S. Constitution. In addition, many individual 
    commenters, as well as health care providers, organizations 
    representing providers, and consumer advocacy groups, emphasized the 
    importance of protecting individuals' health information privacy. These 
    commenters raised concerns regarding the possible adverse consequences 
    an express permission to report certain information could have on the 
    patient-provider treatment relationship and individuals' willingness to 
    seek needed mental health care.\21\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \21\ Please see the ANPRM for a more thorough discussion of 
    public comments and responses. 78 FR 23872 (April 23, 2013).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    III. Summary of the NPRM
    
        After considering the public comments received on the ANPRM, we 
    published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on January 7, 
    2014,\22\ proposing to use the Department's broad authority under HIPAA 
    to specify the permitted uses and disclosures of PHI by HIPAA covered 
    entities. The NPRM proposed to revise 45 CFR 164.512 of the Privacy 
    Rule by adding a new category of permitted disclosures to 45 CFR 
    164.512(k), which addresses uses and disclosures for specialized 
    government functions. The NPRM proposed new provisions at (k)(7) that 
    would permit certain covered entities to disclose the limited 
    demographic and certain other information needed for NICS reporting 
    purposes.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \22\ See 79 FR 784 (January 7, 2014).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        We indicated in the NPRM that there is a strong public safety need 
    for this information to be accessible to the NICS and that some States 
    are currently under-reporting or not reporting this information at all. 
    Further, although most of the information relevant to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor is held by entities that are not covered by 
    HIPAA, for those few HIPAA covered entities that may be involved in the 
    relevant commitments or adjudications, the Privacy Rule's existing 
    paths for disclosure did not appear to be sufficient. We explained 
    that, to the extent that some covered entities perform adjudicatory or 
    repository functions in States that have not enacted laws requiring 
    reporting to the NICS, and that a subset of those may be unable to 
    achieve hybrid entity status due to administrative challenges or other 
    reasons, an express permission would provide clarity and remove a 
    barrier to their reporting.
        However, to address concerns regarding an express permission's 
    potential to harm the patient-provider relationship or deterring 
    individuals from seeking needed mental health care, we proposed to 
    narrowly tailor the permission to report information on individuals 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor in a number of ways. 
    Specifically, we proposed to limit: (1) Which covered entities could 
    use or disclose PHI for NICS reporting purposes, (2) to whom the PHI 
    could be disclosed, and (3) the scope of the information that could be 
    used or disclosed.
        First, the NPRM proposed a new paragraph at 164.512(k)(7)(i) to 
    permit certain NICS disclosures only by those covered entities that 
    function as repositories of information relevant to the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor on behalf of a State or that are responsible for 
    ordering the involuntary commitments or other adjudications that make 
    an individual subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor. The 
    Federal prohibitor regulations define an involuntary commitment as a 
    formal commitment of a person to a mental institution by a court, 
    board, commission, or other lawful authority. The other applicable 
    adjudications include determinations by a court, board, commission, or 
    other lawful authority that persons are a danger to themselves or 
    others, or lack the mental capacity to contract or manage their own 
    affairs, as a result of marked subnormal intelligence, or mental 
    illness, incompetency, condition, or disease.\23\ The prohibitor does 
    not apply to individuals in a psychiatric facility for observation or 
    who have been admitted voluntarily; thus, the proposed rule would not 
    have permitted disclosures with respect to those individuals.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \23\ See 27 CFR 478.11 (Definitions).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        With respect to repositories of Federal mental health prohibitor 
    information, we explained further that we did not intend to require 
    States to formally designate the entities responsible for NICS 
    reporting, but that we would expect States to be able to identify the 
    relevant entities.
        We noted in the NPRM that our understanding was that lawful 
    authority for performing such adjudications and repository functions 
    rests, for the most part, with entities that operate outside the scope 
    of HIPAA. However, in the interest of public safety, we wanted to 
    ensure that relevant adjudications could be reported in the subset of 
    States in which HIPAA covered entities may make, or collect and report 
    records of, these determinations.
        We explained further that, in permitting only entities involved in 
    these adjudicatory or repository/reporting functions to use or disclose 
    Federal mental health prohibitor information for NICS purposes, the 
    proposal would not create a permission for most treating providers to 
    disclose PHI about their own patients for these purposes. We agreed 
    with the commenters on the ANPRM who argued that encouraging voluntary 
    treatment is critical to ensuring positive outcomes for individuals' 
    health as well as the public's safety, and explained that the NPRM was 
    designed to balance that goal and the public safety interests served by 
    the NICS. We also agreed that non-health care entities bear primary 
    responsibility for collection and reporting of information relevant to 
    the Federal mental health prohibitor in most States. However, where a 
    HIPAA covered entity is a board, commission, or other lawful authority 
    that makes involuntary commitments or other adjudications that result 
    in individuals being subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, 
    we believed those entities too were likely to hold records of the 
    relevant commitments and adjudications.
        We requested public comment on the extent to which some States may 
    have vested responsibility for Federal mental health prohibitor 
    reporting in HIPAA covered entities, to what extent records needed for 
    NICS reporting are created or maintained by covered entities, and 
    whether there are circumstances in which health care providers would 
    need to report the identity of an individual subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor to a State designated records repository or 
    directly to the NICS. We also requested comment on the types of 
    additional guidance from OCR and/or the NICS that would be helpful for 
    understanding to which covered entities, and under what circumstances, 
    the proposed permission would apply.
        Second, we proposed a new paragraph at (k)(7)(ii) providing that a 
    covered entity identified in (k)(7)(i) may use or disclose Federal 
    mental health prohibitor information for NICS purposes only directly to 
    the NICS or to an entity designated by the State as a repository of 
    data for purposes of reporting to the NICS. By clearly delimiting the 
    permitted recipients of such disclosures, we explained that the rule 
    would ensure that covered entities do not exceed the intended scope of 
    the permission by disclosing information relevant to the Federal mental 
    health
    
    [[Page 386]]
    
    prohibitor to, for example, law enforcement agencies that do not 
    operate as repositories of data for purposes of reporting to the 
    NICS.\24\ We requested comment on whether there are States in which a 
    type of entity not described in this proposed paragraph is responsible 
    for NICS reporting and thus, should be able to receive NICS data from a 
    HIPAA covered entity.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \24\ We did not propose to change the Privacy Rule's existing 
    permissions to use or disclose PHI for specific law enforcement 
    investigations, as provided in 45 CFR 164.512(f).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Third, we proposed a new paragraph at (k)(7)(iii) to limit the 
    information permitted to be used or disclosed to what is needed for 
    purposes of reporting to the NICS. This is consistent with the Privacy 
    Rule provision that generally requires covered entities to make 
    reasonable efforts to limit the PHI used or disclosed to the minimum 
    necessary to accomplish the intended purpose. Specifically, in the 
    proposed regulation text, we made clear that only the limited 
    demographic and certain other information needed for purposes of 
    reporting to the NICS could be reported under the permission. We 
    indicated that, at the time, we believed that the necessary information 
    would be the data elements needed to create a NICS Index record: (1) 
    Name of the individual; (2) date of birth; (3) sex; (4) a code or 
    notation indicating that the individual is subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor; (5) a code or notation representing the 
    reporting entity; and (6) a code identifying the agency record 
    supporting the prohibition. The proposed regulation text expressly 
    provided that the proposed modification would not permit the use or 
    disclosure of clinical or diagnostic information for NICS reporting 
    purposes. We requested comment on whether, and in what circumstances, 
    HIPAA covered entities or other entities, such as courts, currently 
    report to a records repository or directly to the NICS information that 
    was not listed in the proposed paragraph.
        In addition, we explained that we were also considering permitting 
    the disclosure of some or all the following additional data elements, 
    which are optional fields for a NICS Index entry, for NICS reporting 
    purposes: Social Security number, place of birth, State of residence, 
    height, weight, eye color, hair color, and race. As we noted in the 
    NPRM, from what we understand, these elements are not included in every 
    NICS record, but often are used to confirm that a prospective firearm 
    recipient matches a record searched by the NICS or to eliminate ``false 
    positive'' background check results. We requested public comment on 
    this issue.
        We also proposed to limit the permission to uses and disclosures 
    about individuals who are subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor and not to apply it to disclosures about individuals subject 
    only to State mental health prohibitors. However, we requested comment 
    on this aspect of the scope of the permission, specifically with regard 
    to whether the permission should be broadened to allow covered entities 
    to also disclose the identities of individuals who are prohibited by 
    State law from possessing or receiving firearms for reasons related to 
    mental health.
        Finally, we also explained that the proposed permission would apply 
    only with respect to the PHI of individuals subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor and not to the PHI of those persons who may be 
    subject to the other Federal prohibitors listed at 18 U.S.C. 922(g). 
    The lack of an express HIPAA permission for reporting information 
    relevant to the Federal mental health prohibitor was a limited problem 
    and we had not heard that there was a similar issue with respect to the 
    other prohibitors. Thus, for example, a covered entity would not be 
    able to use the proposed permission to use or disclose information 
    about an individual who is an unlawful user of or addicted to any 
    controlled substance (18 U.S.C. 922(g)(3)), except to the extent the 
    individual was also subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor. We 
    also noted that other laws could impact disclosures related to the 
    other Federal prohibitors, including 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(3).\25\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \25\ The ability of certain entities to report individuals who 
    are subject to the Federal prohibitor at 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(3) may be 
    affected by the Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient 
    Records Regulations, 42 CFR part 2, administered by the Substance 
    Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    IV. Provisions of the Final Regulation
    
        This final rule adopts the modifications to the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
    as proposed. After considering the comments we received, we continue to 
    believe that the creation of a limited express permission in the HIPAA 
    Privacy Rule to use or disclose certain information relevant to the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor for NICS purposes is necessary to 
    address barriers related to HIPAA and to ensure that relevant 
    information can be reported for this important public safety purpose. 
    Furthermore, this narrowly tailored rule appropriately balances public 
    safety goals with important patient privacy interests to ensure that 
    individuals are not discouraged from seeking voluntary treatment.
        Under this final rule, covered entities that order involuntary 
    commitments or make other adjudications that subject individuals to the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor, or that serve as repositories of the 
    relevant data, are permitted to use or disclose the information needed 
    for NICS reporting of such individuals either directly to the NICS or 
    to a State repository of NICS data. Thus, if a covered health care 
    entity also has a role in the relevant mental health adjudications or 
    serves as a State data repository, it now may disclose the relevant 
    information for NICS reporting purposes under this new permission even 
    if it is not designated as a HIPAA hybrid entity or required by State 
    law to report. This final rule does not create an express permission 
    for covered entities to disclose for NICS reporting purposes the PHI of 
    individuals who are subject to State-only mental health prohibitors.
        The Department's rationale for adopting the provisions in this 
    final rule, along with further clarifications and interpretations of 
    the provisions, is explained below in the responses to the public 
    comments on the NPRM.
    
    V. Analysis of and Responses to Public Comments
    
        We received more than 430 public comments in response to the NPRM, 
    including from advocacy organizations, associations of health care and 
    mental health professionals, a state mental health agency, and 
    individual members of the public. A summary of the comments we received 
    on the proposed rule and our responses follow.
    
    A. Comments Regarding Creating an Express Permission for NICS Reporting 
    in the HIPAA Privacy Rule
    
        Comments: A number of commenters expressed general support for 
    including an express permission in the HIPAA Privacy Rule for reporting 
    certain information to the NICS, stating that the rule change would 
    help increase the reporting of information to the NICS, reduce the 
    ability of individuals with serious mental health problems to obtain 
    firearms, and ultimately lessen the risk of harm to the individuals 
    themselves, law enforcement, and the public.
        Several advocacy organizations involved in gun violence prevention 
    agreed with our statements in the NPRM that the HIPAA Privacy Rule and, 
    in some cases, perceptions of the Privacy Rule, may create a barrier to 
    certain entities reporting to the NICS, and that the proposed 
    modification would
    
    [[Page 387]]
    
    address this problem. For example, the comment submitted by Mayors 
    Against Illegal Guns (MAIG) indicated that mental health treatment 
    facilities in seven States currently are required by State law to 
    report Federal mental health prohibitor information either directly to 
    the NICS or to State agencies that report to the NICS, which indicates 
    that mental health facilities do in some cases hold the relevant 
    records. MAIG inferred from this information that there likely are 
    other States in which HIPAA covered entities have information that 
    should be reported to the NICS, but that the entities may not be 
    reporting due to concerns about the HIPAA Privacy Rule's restrictions 
    on disclosures. MAIG also cited statements from interviews its 
    researchers conducted with State officials about issues related to NICS 
    reporting and noted that officials from nine States and the District of 
    Columbia had expressed concern that HIPAA, or other privacy 
    requirements, generally prohibited sending records to the NICS, and 
    thus that reporting would violate such requirements. MAIG asserted that 
    whether these cited concerns were based on real or perceived barriers, 
    its research indicated that making clear the ability to report without 
    violating privacy laws tended to greatly improve state reporting rates, 
    and that the proposed modifications to the Privacy Rule similarly would 
    help states improve their record submissions.\26\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \26\ MAIG, Fatal Gaps, How Missing Records in the Federal 
    Background Check System Put Guns in the Hands of Killers (Nov. 
    2011).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        A number of commenters asserted that increasing reporting to the 
    NICS could, in turn, help to decrease rates of gun violence. One of 
    these commenters cited research indicating that, in one State, having a 
    mental health adjudication record in the NICS database appeared to 
    reduce the chance of a person committing a first violent crime.\27\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \27\ The commenter cited Jeffrey Swanson, Preventing Gun 
    Violence Involving People with Serious Mental Illness in REDUCING 
    GUN VIOLENCE IN AMERICA, INFORMING POLICY WITH EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS 
    (eds. Daniel W. Webster and Jon S. Vernick, 2013). The study authors 
    note that, ``[c]onsidering separately the subgroup of people with 
    serious mental illness who do not have criminal records, our data 
    seem to suggest that the Brady Law background checks can have some 
    positive effect, if enforced. In those with a gun-disqualifying 
    mental health record, risk of violent criminal offending declined 
    significantly after Connecticut began reporting gun-disqualifying 
    mental health records to the NICS.'' The authors also describe the 
    limitations of the study and add, ``[t]hese findings do not prove a 
    causal relationship between the background check system and reduced 
    violent crime.''
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        In addition, a number of commenters, including the American Medical 
    Association (AMA), and the American Psychiatric Association (APA), 
    expressed appreciation that the proposed rule would appropriately 
    balance protecting public safety and preserving the patient-physician 
    relationship by narrowly defining the scope of the permission. The AMA 
    stated that its view on the issue of reporting patient information to 
    the NICS is governed by the association's Code of Medical Ethics and 
    policies adopted by the AMA's policy making body. The AMA indicated 
    that the Code of Ethics supports strong protections for patient privacy 
    and, in most cases, requires physicians to keep patient medical records 
    strictly confidential. If there must be a breach in confidentiality, 
    such as for public health or safety reasons, the disclosures must be as 
    narrow in scope as possible. In light of these considerations, the AMA 
    expressed support for the Department's approach.
        In contrast, many commenters did not support adding an express 
    permission in the HIPAA Privacy Rule for reporting certain information 
    about persons subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor for NICS 
    purposes. Several commenters asserted that there are only ``perceived 
    barriers'' related to HIPAA, not real ones, so changing HIPAA would be 
    unlikely to increase the reporting of mental health prohibitor 
    information for NICS purposes. One commenter suggested that, rather 
    than facing obstacles to reporting, States may be choosing not to 
    report on certain categories of prohibited individuals for reasons 
    unrelated to HIPAA--for example, because the States do not believe the 
    individuals pose a danger.
        Other comments, some of which highlighted the importance of early 
    and appropriate mental health intervention as the most effective way to 
    prevent violence related to mental illness, expressed concern that the 
    proposed permission would discourage individuals from seeking needed 
    treatment. For example, the National Association of Psychiatric Health 
    Systems (NAPHS) predicted that the public perception of the proposed 
    rule would be that, if an individual disclosed information to a 
    therapist, the therapist would be required to ``report'' the patient. 
    This commenter argued that, as a result, the proposed rule would create 
    a chilling effect on individuals' willingness to discuss issues in 
    treatment that could lead to positive resolution rather than violence 
    directed toward themselves or others. A number of commenters also 
    expressed concern that the proposed rule would unfairly target persons 
    with mental illness and perpetuate unfounded and damaging stereotypes 
    about persons with mental illness by sending a message to the public 
    that the Department perceives mental illness as inextricably linked 
    with violence.
        Some commenters expressed general concern regarding the effects of 
    the proposed rule on individuals' privacy interests. A number of these 
    commenters argued that communications between patients and their health 
    care providers should be kept confidential under all circumstances.
        Response: After considering the comments, we continue to believe 
    that the creation of a limited express permission in the HIPAA Privacy 
    Rule to disclose information relevant to the Federal mental prohibitor 
    for NICS purposes is necessary to address barriers to reporting. In 
    particular, to the extent that some States do not require reporting by 
    law, and reporting entities in those States may face administrative or 
    other challenges in creating a hybrid entity, the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
    may create impediments to reporting that cannot be cured through mere 
    guidance. Therefore, we believe such an express permission will serve 
    an important public safety interest by removing a barrier to reporting 
    that may exist in certain circumstances and thereby potentially 
    increase reporting by States that historically have reported little or 
    no Federal mental health prohibitor data to the NICS due to concerns 
    about violating the Privacy Rule.
        Further, we believe that the limitations contained in the narrowly 
    tailored express permission we adopt appropriately respond to 
    commenters' important concerns about discouraging individuals who need 
    mental health treatment from seeking care. First, we limit the 
    permission to only those covered entities that order the involuntary 
    commitments or make the other adjudications that cause individuals to 
    be subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, or that serve as 
    repositories of such information for NICS reporting purposes. Thus, the 
    rule does not affect most treating providers or create a permission for 
    them to disclose PHI about their own patients for these purposes. 
    Second, we permit such entities to disclose NICS data only to 
    designated repositories or the NICS. Third, we limit the information 
    that may be disclosed to certain demographic or other information that 
    is necessary for NICS reporting. Finally, we do not expand the 
    permission to encompass State law prohibitor information. These aspects 
    of the provision are discussed more fully below. By limiting the 
    permission in
    
    [[Page 388]]
    
    these ways, we protect the patient-provider relationship. Further, we 
    believe these limitations carefully balance an individual's privacy 
    interests with the public safety interest in reporting certain 
    information to the NICS.
        In response to concerns that the rule unfairly singles out 
    individuals with mental illness, we emphasize, as we did in the 
    proposed rule, that a mental health diagnosis does not, in itself, make 
    an individual subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, which 
    requires an involuntary commitment or adjudication that the individual 
    poses a danger to self or others or lacks the mental capacity to 
    contract or manage his or her own affairs.
        In addition, the Department continues to support efforts by the 
    Administration to dispel negative attitudes and misperceptions relating 
    to mental illness and to encourage individuals to seek voluntary mental 
    health treatment. With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, 
    millions of Americans who did not previously have coverage will receive 
    coverage for mental health services.
    
    B. Comments Regarding the Scope of the Permission
    
    Expanding to State Law Prohibitors
        Comments: We received several comments in response to our question 
    about whether the permission should be expanded to include State law 
    prohibitors. Of these, a minority of commenters supported expanding the 
    proposed rule to permit disclosures of information about individuals 
    who are subject to State-only mental health prohibitors (i.e., State 
    prohibitors that have different criteria than the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor). Several commenters who advocated for the disclosure of 
    such information for NICS reporting purposes asserted that State law 
    prohibitors would be effective only if accurate and adequate 
    information were submitted to the NICS. One of these commenters argued 
    that State efforts to report disqualifying records to the NICS should 
    be encouraged, not curtailed by confusion over the applicability of the 
    HIPAA Privacy Rules. The commenter also argued that it would create 
    greater confusion not to include the same express permission with 
    respect to State mental health prohibitor information as was proposed 
    for the reporting of information related to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor.
        Another commenter who supported a permission to disclose 
    information about individuals who are subject to State-only mental 
    health prohibitors argued that increasing the disclosures to the NICS 
    about individuals who are prohibited by State law (but perhaps not 
    Federal law) from purchasing firearms could address the situation in 
    which a person who is subject to a prohibitor in the person's State of 
    residence enters another State temporarily for the sole purpose of 
    obtaining a firearm and then returns to the State where ownership is 
    prohibited with a firearm. This commenter voiced the concern that, if 
    the State of residence does not provide information about individuals 
    who are subject to State law prohibitors to the Federal background 
    check system, a FFL in another State would not know that the individual 
    is subject to a prohibitor.
        Several commenters asserted that an express permission to disclose 
    information about individuals who are subject to State mental health 
    prohibitors would help to avoid a misinterpretation that HIPAA 
    prohibits disclosures of PHI relevant to State mental health 
    prohibitors in circumstances when HIPAA otherwise would not. Another 
    commenter argued that, as some State law prohibitors were enacted 
    before HIPAA, State legislators would not have foreseen HIPAA-related 
    obstacles to disclosure or the resulting need to require reporting to 
    the NICS by law; as a result, those States may not have laws in place 
    to require the reporting of State law prohibitors.
        One commenter who supported extending the permission argued that 
    the reporting of State mental health prohibitors would be consistent 
    with congressional intent, as expressed through statutes aimed at 
    preventing gun violence. The commenter asserted that the NICS was 
    established under the Brady Gun Law to serve as a central aggregated 
    database of information regarding the identities of individuals who are 
    prohibited from possessing firearms under any Federal, State, or local 
    law.
        In contrast, a number of commenters, including several associations 
    of mental health professionals, expressed concern that expanding the 
    reporting permission to apply to State law mental health prohibitors 
    would involve more treating health care providers in NICS reporting, 
    and that individuals would not seek treatment for mental health 
    problems if they felt that simply by seeking treatment they could be 
    reported to the NICS.
        Several commenters, including two mental health professional 
    associations, expressed concern that State mental health prohibitors 
    are being expanded in an overly broad manner that will further negative 
    attitudes and misperceptions about mental illness. The commenters 
    pointed to an example of a State statute that requires health care 
    providers to report to the NICS the identities of all individuals with 
    intellectual disabilities, as well as individuals who voluntarily 
    commit themselves to a mental institution.
        The CCDRTF provided additional examples of State law mental health 
    prohibitors that are significantly broader than the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor and expressed concern that many of these State 
    prohibitors apply to individuals without the benefit of an adjudication 
    by a court, board, commission or other lawful authority, as provided 
    for under the Federal prohibitor.\28\ This commenter asserted that the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor forbids the reporting of information 
    to the NICS about individuals who are subject to broader State mental 
    health prohibitors due to a lack of equivalent procedural protections 
    for such individuals; therefore, this commenter argued, to permit 
    reporting related to State mental health prohibitors would violate the 
    Supremacy Clause and raise due process concerns.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \28\ This commenter described laws enacted in four States. 
    According to the commenter, New York law requires all mental health 
    professionals to report any person undergoing treatment that is 
    ``likely to engage in conduct that would result in serious harm to 
    self or others'' (citing N.Y. Mental Hygiene. Law Sec.  9.46), while 
    New York's SAFE Act requires mental health treatment providers to 
    report covered individuals to a state database without an 
    adjudicatory process (citing N.Y. Mental Hygiene Law Sec.  9.46). In 
    California, the commenter stated, prohibitors apply to individuals 
    undergoing voluntary inpatient treatment (citing 30 Cal. Welf. & 
    Inst. Code Sec.  8100(a)); and apply to individuals involuntarily 
    held as inpatients under 72-hour holds (citing Cal. Welf. & Inst. 
    Code Sec.  8103(f) and Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code Sec.  5150) without 
    the types of adjudications contemplated under the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor (citing 18 U.S.C. 922(g); U.S. v. Rehlander, 666 
    F.3d 45, 50 (1st Cir. 2012). Finally, the commenter noted that 
    Illinois and Hawaii have prohibitors that apply to all individuals 
    who have received particular diagnoses (citing 31 430 Ill. Comp. 
    Stat. 65/8(g) (intellectual disability) and (s) (developmental 
    disability); Haw. Rev. Stat. Ann. Sec.  134-7(c) (persons with 
    significant DSM diagnosed disorder).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        A number of commenters who opposed the reporting of State mental 
    health prohibitors expressed concern that the broadest State law 
    prohibitors would become the de facto national standard if the NICS 
    were to include State law prohibitors. Others raised concerns about the 
    increased complexity involved in accurately maintaining the NICS 
    database with the addition of State law prohibitor records, including 
    challenges associated with avoiding or identifying duplicate reports, 
    resulting in less reliability, increased inaccuracy, and improper
    
    [[Page 389]]
    
    denial of rights, as well as adding complexity to appeals.
        Response: We share the concerns of commenters that, due to the 
    breadth of some State law prohibitors, the inclusion of State-only 
    prohibitors in the permission would increase the involvement of 
    treating providers in NICS reporting, which could negatively affect 
    patient-provider treatment relationships and discourage some 
    individuals from seeking care. While we note that the NICS currently 
    receives some information on State law prohibitors, given these 
    concerns and the importance of protecting the patient-provider 
    relationship, we do not think it is appropriate to expand the 
    permission with respect to HIPAA covered entities. We agree with the 
    commenters who stated that the health and safety of individuals and the 
    public is best served if persons with mental illness obtain appropriate 
    treatment; by limiting the permission to the narrower Federal mental 
    health prohibitor, and carefully tailoring the permission in the ways 
    described throughout this preamble, this final rule is designed to 
    ensure that such persons are not discouraged from seeking care.
        With respect to some commenters' concerns about State mental health 
    prohibitors being ineffective without a HIPAA disclosure permission, we 
    note that the Privacy Rule does not affect the reporting of State law 
    prohibitors by non-HIPAA covered entities, which are the entities that 
    maintain most of the relevant information. Moreover, to the extent that 
    covered entities maintain relevant State law prohibitor information and 
    a State wants to ensure that the reporting of this information can 
    occur, the Privacy Rule provides certain other avenues for disclosure, 
    as we have described elsewhere. For example, although our balancing of 
    interests limits this express permission under HIPAA to disclosures 
    related to the Federal mental health prohibitor, this rule does not 
    prevent State legislators from differently balancing the privacy, 
    health, and public safety issues involved with respect to their State 
    level mental health prohibitors--nor does the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor itself prohibit reporting to the NICS of State law 
    prohibitor information, as a commenter asserted. If State legislators 
    determine that information related to a State-only prohibitor should be 
    disclosed despite any potential chilling effect on seeking treatment, 
    they can enact a State law requiring the relevant entities to report 
    such information. Alternatively, the relevant covered entities can 
    create a hybrid entity, separating their HIPAA covered health care 
    functions from their NICS reporting or repository functions, such that 
    the information maintained by the covered health care component is 
    subject to the Privacy Rule, while information held by the non-covered 
    component can be reported without regard to the Privacy Rule.
        We disagree with the commenters who argued that excluding State-
    only mental health prohibitor information from the permission will 
    create confusion. We do not think this will occur because this final 
    rule clearly indicates that it applies where firearm possession is 
    prohibited under a specific provision in Federal law. We also note that 
    the rule delineates the types of covered entities that are permitted to 
    disclose, the information they are permitted to share, the categories 
    of individuals covered by the permission, and the entities to which 
    they can make such disclosures. In addition, we intend to work with DOJ 
    to develop additional guidance on the categories within the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor. Moreover, we do not believe this final rule 
    will create a misperception that HIPAA always prohibits the reporting 
    to the NICS of individuals who are subject to State-only mental health 
    prohibitors. As explained elsewhere in this preamble, the Privacy Rule 
    already permits uses and disclosures of PHI that are required by law, 
    including State law reporting requirements; also, HIPAA covered 
    entities that perform both health care and non-health care functions 
    (e.g., NICS reporting) are permitted to create hybrid entities under 
    HIPAA so that the Privacy Rule applies only to their health care 
    functions. This final rule does not change those provisions.
        Finally, we do not agree that Congress intended for State (or 
    local) law prohibitor information to be reported to the NICS in all 
    circumstances, such as where doing so would conflict with 
    countervailing privacy concerns due to the treatment relationship 
    between patients and health care providers. Therefore, this final rule 
    balances a variety of important interests, including protecting the 
    privacy of individuals' personal health information, ensuring access to 
    needed mental health care services, and advancing the public safety 
    interests in ensuring that persons who are prohibited by Federal law 
    from purchasing or possessing a firearm for mental health reasons do 
    not gain access to firearms.
    Entities Permitted To Report
        Comment: Several commenters, including the AMA and the National 
    Association of Psychiatric Health Systems, expressed support for the 
    proposal to limit the permission to only those entities in a State that 
    are directly involved in the relevant adjudications or maintain records 
    of them for NICS reporting purposes. These commenters expressed 
    appreciation for the narrow drafting of the NPRM based on the need to 
    support provider-patient relationships and encourage individuals with 
    mental illness to seek appropriate care.
        However, several advocacy organizations and many individuals argued 
    that direct treatment providers should not be permitted to report 
    information about their patients to the NICS under any circumstances 
    (i.e., even if they are, or are part of, the entity that orders 
    involuntary commitments or conducts other relevant adjudications, or 
    serves as a repository of NICS data). Some of these commenters argued 
    that reports to the NICS database should come only from the judiciary.
        Finally, we did not receive responses to the question we posed in 
    the NPRM about whether additional types of covered entities within a 
    State (other than those identified in the proposed regulatory text) 
    might be expected, and thus should be permitted under the Privacy Rule, 
    to report data to the NICS or to a State repository.
        Response: We agree with the commenters who emphasized the need to 
    protect the provider-patient relationship, and this final rule 
    addresses such concerns by limiting the permission to those covered 
    entities that also perform an adjudicatory or data repository function. 
    Furthermore, as described more fully elsewhere in this preamble, the 
    permission does not extend to broader State law prohibitors, which may 
    not require a formal adjudication or involuntary commitment and whose 
    inclusion likely would involve more treatment providers in NICS 
    reporting.
        In response to comments arguing that only entities in the court 
    system should be permitted to report to NICS, it is our understanding, 
    based on public comments and our fact finding, that courts do not 
    create or maintain records of all of the involuntary commitments or 
    other adjudications that make individuals subject to the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor. Therefore, for the NICS database to include reports 
    of all persons subject to the mental health prohibitor, it is necessary 
    for certain other entities that create or maintain such information to 
    be able to report. We believe this permission will help strengthen the 
    background check system to ensure that individuals who are prohibited 
    from purchasing or
    
    [[Page 390]]
    
    possessing firearms are prevented from obtaining them. We also 
    acknowledge the concerns of commenters who argued that providers should 
    not be permitted to report information about their patients under any 
    circumstances. As explained in more detail elsewhere in this preamble, 
    to address these and other concerns, we have carefully tailored this 
    final rule to limit the involvement health care providers, and to 
    prevent disclosures of diagnostic or clinical information for NICS 
    reporting purposes.
    Demographic and Certain Other Information Permitted To Be Reported
        Comment: Many commenters specifically voiced support for the NPRM's 
    proposal not to permit the disclosure of diagnostic or clinical 
    information for NICS reporting purposes. (We also noted in the NPRM 
    that the NICS does not request or contain such information.) For 
    example, the American Medical Association stated that it strongly 
    supported restricting the information disclosed to the limited 
    demographic and other information needed for reporting, as the NPRM 
    proposed. To support the point that NICS reporting is sufficiently 
    limited, another commenter pointed out that the information that is 
    reported to the NICS generally is provided by the individual to a FFL 
    on the required application for the firearm.
        In contrast, one commenter asserted that, as written, the proposed 
    permission would grant discretion to state entities to determine the 
    scope of ``demographic and certain other information'' to be reported 
    and argued further that DOJ (specifically ATF), not HHS, has authority 
    to define the ``minimum'' information required by NICS.
        In response to our request for comment on whether, and in what 
    circumstances, entities currently report, or should be permitted to 
    report, additional data elements needed to confirm an individual's 
    identity, the Connecticut Department of Mental Health and Addiction 
    Services (DMHAS) asserted that certain additional data elements are 
    helpful in confirming whether an individual is appropriately excluded 
    from gun purchase or possession in cases where multiple individuals 
    share the same name and date of birth. Several other commenters agreed 
    that permitting the disclosure of additional data elements for NICS 
    reporting purposes would allow more accurate verification of an 
    individual's identity, resulting in fewer erroneous denials, and would 
    facilitate the correction and updating of NICS entries.
        The Connecticut DMHAS and others suggested the inclusion of some or 
    all of the following specific data elements: Social Security number, 
    place of birth, state of residence, height, weight, eye color, hair 
    color, and race. Social Security number and race were cited as the most 
    reliable indicators of an individual's true identity.
        Response: We agree with the commenters who stated that limiting the 
    permission to exclude diagnostic and clinical information appropriately 
    balances individuals' privacy interests and public safety priorities. 
    We also agree that there may be data elements beyond those needed to 
    create the NICS record (i.e., the individual's name, sex, and date of 
    birth; as well as codes identifying (1) the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor, (2) the record documenting the involuntary commitment or 
    adjudication, and (3) the entity from which the record initiated) that 
    may be helpful in verifying identity and excluding false matches. Given 
    that, the final rule provides some flexibility for States or reporting 
    entities. We do not specify in the regulatory text which data elements 
    may be disclosed, but clarify in this preamble that what generally 
    would be considered the information ``needed for purposes of reporting 
    to the [NICS]'' in Sec.  164.512(k)(7)(iii)(A) would be the data 
    elements required to create a NICS record, as well as the following 
    elements to the extent necessary to exclude false matches: Social 
    Security number, State of residence, height, weight, place of birth, 
    eye color, hair color, and race (and we note that the Federal Bureau of 
    Investigations (FBI) and not ATF has the authority to define the 
    information required by NICS). As indicated above, these are the same 
    elements that were identified in the NPRM.
    
    C. Comments Regarding the NICS and the Federal Mental Health Prohibitor
    
        Comment: Many commenters raised concerns about infringement of 
    individuals' Second Amendment right to bear arms without due process. A 
    number of these commenters specifically expressed concern that an 
    individual could be reported to the NICS without a formal adjudication 
    through the court system and argued that due process under the 
    Constitution would require a hearing in a court of law before an 
    individual could be made subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor.
        Response: We acknowledge the views of the commenters. However, as 
    we explained in the NPRM, these concerns relate to the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor rather than the HIPAA Privacy Rule or this final 
    rule, and thus are outside the scope of this rule. This final rule 
    addresses HIPAA-related barriers to entities reporting certain 
    information to the NICS about individuals who are subject to the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor. The rule does not expand the 
    categories of federally prohibited persons or modify the criteria for 
    determining that a person is subject to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor.
        Comment: Several disability rights advocates and others asserted 
    that the rule would not result in a decrease in gun violence because 
    mental illness alone does not make a person more likely to commit 
    violence against others. The Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities 
    Rights Task Force (CCDRTF) cited studies indicating that mental illness 
    alone is not statistically related to future violence and that even 
    severe mental illness without drug use or a history of violence is not 
    linked with future violence.\29\ Several commenters also noted that 
    persons with mental illness are more likely to be the victims of 
    violence than its perpetrators. Alternatively, several commenters 
    argued that, even if there were a link between mental illness and gun 
    violence, the proposed rule is not needed because mechanisms already 
    are in place in place to prevent harm from patients who are a threat to 
    themselves or the public.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \29\ CCDRTF cited Eric B. Elbogen & Sally C. Johnson, The 
    Intricate Link Between Violence and Mental Disorder: Results from 
    the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, 
    66 Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 152, 157 (Feb. 2009); David J. Vinkers, et 
    al., Proportion of Crimes Attributable to Mental Disorders in the 
    Netherlands Population, 11 World Psychiatry 134 (June 2012). CCDRTF 
    also indicated that other studies showed a modest relationship 
    between serious mental illness and violence, but that other factors 
    (e.g., substance abuse, age, gender and lower economic status) 
    contribute more to increasing the likelihood of committing violence 
    than mental illness alone. They cited R. Van Dorn, et al., Mental 
    Disorder and Violence: Is There a Relationship Beyond Substance 
    Use?, 47 Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 487, 499 
    (2012).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Response: We acknowledge the views of the commenters. However, 
    these commenters address the applicability of the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor itself. This final rule does not expand the existing 
    categories of persons prohibited from owning a firearm or modify other 
    Federal or State laws pertaining to firearms purchases. Therefore, 
    these comments are beyond the scope of this rule.
        Comment: Several commenters raised questions about individuals' 
    ability to correct erroneous NICS reports or to
    
    [[Page 391]]
    
    have their rights restored when they no longer pose a danger to 
    themselves or others. A number of commenters recommended assuring that 
    the appeals process is free of delay, inexpensive, and easy for 
    individuals to initiate.
        Other commenters asserted that the expense to remove oneself from 
    the NICS database is prohibitive for some individuals. As a result, the 
    commenters said, individuals effectively become subject to a lifelong 
    restriction on their Second Amendment right to bear arms, even after 
    they recover from the condition that led to their adjudication and are 
    eligible to apply for relief from disabilities under the Federal mental 
    health prohibitor. Similarly, one commenter argued that, once an 
    individual is reported to the NICS, the ``relief from disabilities'' 
    process \30\ is inadequate for remediation due to a lack of Federal 
    funding to support State programs, and wide variability in State 
    programs to provide relief as a result. Another commenter recommended 
    allocating additional funding to support State ``relief from 
    disabilities'' programs.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \30\ See footnote 13 above.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Response: These comments are outside the scope of the rule. 
    However, we acknowledge the commenters' concerns with respect to 
    opportunities for remediation and note that individuals who believe 
    they are wrongly denied the purchase of a firearm can visit <https://forms.fbi.gov/nice-appeals-request-form> to find out more information 
    and appeal their denial. In addition, the NICS Improvement Amendments 
    Act of 2007 authorized grants for States that implement programs for 
    ``relief from disabilities'' in accordance with the Act.\31\ These 
    programs are required to establish processes by which an individual who 
    is subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor may apply for relief 
    to the State where the relevant commitment or adjudication occurred. 
    While States' processes for granting relief vary, the Act requires that 
    relief be granted if it can be established that the circumstances 
    regarding the disability and the applicant's record and reputation are 
    such that the applicant will not be likely to act in a manner dangerous 
    to public safety, and the granting of relief would not be contrary to 
    the public interest.\32\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \31\ The DOJ Bureau of Justice Statistics provides state data on 
    NICS Act Record Improvement Program (NARIP) Awards (available at 
    [http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid;=491#promising](http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=491#promising)).
        \32\ See Public Law 110-180, Section 105.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Comment: A number of commenters expressed concern that a finding of 
    mental incompetence by the Veterans Administration (VA), which could 
    make an individual subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor and 
    cause the individual to be reported to the NICS, may be based solely on 
    a determination that the veteran is unable to handle financial affairs, 
    without regard to dangerousness. The commenters argued that these 
    veterans do not receive due process before being made subject to the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor and believed that the proposed rule 
    would exacerbate this problem.
        Response: We note that, as a federal agency, the VA is required by 
    law to report prohibited persons to the Attorney General, who oversees 
    the NICS.\33\ This final rule does not affect that requirement or 
    change the procedures relating to adjudications that make individuals 
    subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor.\34\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \33\ See NICS Improvement Amendments Act of 2007 Sec. 101, 18 
    U.S.C. 922 note (2002).
        \34\ We refer commenters to the VA regulations for information 
    about the due process afforded to veterans as part of VA competency 
    determinations. See 38 CFR 3.353 and 38 CFR 3.103.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    D. Other Comments
    
        Comment: A few commenters expressed concern that covered entities 
    would misinterpret the proposed permission as a requirement to report 
    information about their patients to the NICS. Another commenter 
    expressed concern that the standards for reporting NICS data will be 
    adopted by courts as a new standard of care for health care providers, 
    exposing covered entities that do not report to increased liability. 
    The commenter requested that the Department clarify that the HIPAA 
    permission is permissive, not mandatory.
        Response: This final rule establishes permission for certain HIPAA 
    covered entities--those with lawful authority to make the adjudications 
    or commitment decisions that make individuals subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor, or that serve as repositories of information 
    for NICS reporting purposes--are permitted to disclose the information 
    needed for these purposes. The rule does not create a requirement to 
    disclose. In addition, as explained at length in the NPRM and above, 
    the rule does not apply to most treating providers, but only to those 
    covered entities that are responsible for the involuntary commitments 
    or other adjudications that make individuals subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor, or that serve as repositories of such data. 
    However, we note that covered entities have a responsibility to comply 
    with all applicable laws, and this final rule does not preempt State or 
    other laws that may require reporting to the NICS.
        Comment: One commenter recommended that the Department evaluate 
    whether the rule would have the unintended consequence of permitting 
    the reporting of individuals based on mere medical findings.
        Response: As we explain above, the rule does not create a broad 
    permission for treating providers to report information about their 
    patients to the NICS. Rather, the rule is narrowly tailored to permit 
    limited disclosures of information about individuals who are subject to 
    the Federal mental health prohibitor, which applies only where an 
    individual has been involuntarily committed or otherwise has received a 
    relevant adjudication from a court, board, commission, or other lawful 
    authority.
        Comment: One commenter recommended training for the workforce 
    members of reporting entities to ensure that they understand the 
    applicable reporting protocols sufficiently to avoid making erroneous 
    reports.
        Response: We agree that training is generally beneficial to assure 
    compliance with applicable standards. Further, to the extent that 
    reporting entities also are HIPAA covered entities, the Privacy Rule 
    requires those entities to train workforce members on the policies and 
    procedures with respect to the privacy and security of individuals' 
    health information. Where applicable, such training would include 
    ensuring that workforce members have copies of the entity's policies 
    and procedures implementing this final rule's limited permission for 
    uses or disclosures of PHI for NICS reporting purposes.
        Comment: One commenter recommended establishing a mechanism to 
    inform mental health patients and their caregivers about the patients' 
    status in the NICS.
        Response: We decline to provide for such a mechanism in this final 
    rule because it is outside the scope of the rule. Nothing in this rule, 
    however, precludes covered entities from informing individuals that 
    information about them has been provided to the NICS.
        Comment: Several commenters expressed concern that, by allowing 
    multiple entities within a State to report to the NICS, the proposed 
    rule would create complexity, inaccuracy, and delay in processing 
    appeals, particularly if the FBI refers the individual back to the 
    reporting entity for resolution.
        Response: To the extent that the involvement of multiple entities 
    in NICS reporting may affect the appeals process in a state, this issue 
    exists apart
    
    [[Page 392]]
    
    from HIPAA. Each State determines the entity or entities responsible 
    for reporting NICS data, depending on where the records documenting a 
    person's status as subject to one or more of the Federal prohibitors 
    are created or maintained. As a result, a variety of entities, 
    including judicial, law enforcement, public health, and other entities 
    in a State, already may be involved in NICS reporting and appeals.
        Comment: A few commenters expressed concern that, as a result of 
    the proposed rule, some families may choose not to seek involuntary 
    commitment proceedings for a family member who needs treatment, but 
    whose livelihood depends on the ability to possess a firearm (e.g., 
    first responders and members of the military), because the commitment 
    would result in a report to the NICS and the loss of the patient's 
    livelihood.
        Response: We note that the Federal mental health prohibitor makes 
    the purchase or possession of firearms by prohibited individuals 
    unlawful regardless of whether an individual is reported to the NICS, 
    and this final rule does not change who is subject to the Federal 
    mental health prohibitor. This final rule also does not affect law 
    enforcement and military entities' authorities with respect to making 
    their workforce decisions.
        Comment: One commenter asked whether covered entities are obligated 
    to update information they have submitted to the NICS when an 
    individual's circumstances change.
        Response: Section 102(c)(1)(B) of the NIAA requires States to 
    update, correct, modify, or remove a record from the NICS if they 
    determine that the person is not prohibited or has received ``relief 
    from disabilities'' under the mental health prohibitor.
        Comment: A number of commenters argued that the proposed regulation 
    would contravene congressional intent, arguing that Congress did not 
    intend to change HIPAA protections for NICS purposes. The commenters 
    stated that legislation on this topic had been considered and rejected 
    and specifically cited S. 649 (the ``Fix Gun Checks Act''), which was 
    considered by the Senate on April 18, 2013, but did not receive a vote.
        Similarly, some commenters asserted that Congress could have 
    included any desired changes to HIPAA when it passed the NICS 
    Improvements Amendments Act, but did not do so. Therefore, the 
    commenters argued, Congress did not intend to modify HIPAA for NICS 
    reporting purposes.
        Response: That Congress did not enact S. 649 does not provide 
    relevant evidence of congressional intent with respect to the scope of 
    the HIPAA Privacy Rule. The absence of a provision in the NIAA to 
    modify HIPAA does not imply that Congress intended to prevent any 
    revisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule with respect to the NICS. The HIPAA 
    statute confers broad authority on the Department to specify the 
    permitted uses and disclosures of PHI by HIPAA covered entities, and 
    NIAA does not affect this statutory authority.
        Comment: Several disability rights organizations asserted that the 
    proposed rule did not provide sufficient evidence of HIPAA barriers to 
    reporting in any State to fulfill a requirement of the Administrative 
    Procedure Act (APA) that there be a rational connection between the 
    facts found by a Federal agency through the rulemaking process and the 
    regulatory choice made.\35\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \35\ 5 U.S.C. Subchapter II.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Response: We disagree with the commenters. As stated above, we 
    understand from other comments that at least seven States currently 
    rely on HIPAA covered entities (such as mental health facilities) to 
    report Federal mental health prohibitor data to the NICS. These seven 
    States have laws regarding such reporting, but other States may not. To 
    the extent that any other State does not require NICS-related 
    disclosures by law and the State has not enacted legislation addressing 
    the problem, the Privacy Rule, prior to the effective date of this 
    final rule, would have prevented such disclosures by HIPAA covered 
    entities that do not have hybrid entity status.\36\ Therefore, there 
    are sufficient data demonstrating that HIPAA's disclosure restrictions 
    can be a barrier to NICS reporting, and thus to the development of an 
    accurate and comprehensive NICS database. The data support finalizing 
    this modification to the Privacy Rule, which removes barriers while 
    limiting the circumstances under which covered entities may disclose 
    PHI to the NICS and limiting the types of PHI that may be disclosed.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \36\ We note that at least three states have laws permitting, 
    but not requiring the disclosure of mental health records to the 
    NICS: Missouri, New Jersey and West Virginia. See Mo. Rev. Stat. 
    630.140 (2013); N.J. Stat. Ann. 30:4-24.3 (2013); W.Va. Code 61-7A-3 
    (2013).
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        We know of one State in particular in which the Privacy Rule's 
    disclosure restrictions posed challenges for NICS reporting. The State 
    of New York had a statute requiring mental health facilities in the 
    State to report NICS data to the State mental health agency, the 
    State's designated repository of NICS data.\37\ As a result, the 
    Privacy Rule permitted such disclosures to the repository as required-
    by-law disclosures. However, the statute did not expressly require the 
    mental health agency, which was a covered entity under HIPAA that did 
    not have hybrid entity status, to report the data it collected to the 
    NICS; the Privacy Rule thus did not permit the agency to disclose this 
    data. Ultimately, the legislature needed to revise the statute to 
    expressly require the agency to report the data to the NICS.\38\
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \37\ 2008 N.Y. Laws 491, codified at N.Y. Mental Hyg. Sec. Sec.  
    7.09(j); 13.09(g), 31.11(5), 33.13(b), (c) (2011); N.Y. Jud. Ct. 
    Acts Sec.  212(q) (2011).
        \38\ NY Secure Ammunition and Firearms Enforcement (SAFE) Act of 
    2013.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        In addition to removing barriers, an additional benefit of the rule 
    as described more fully below is that it provides clarity about the 
    applicability of the Privacy Rule and its relationship to State law in 
    this area, as well as provides an avenue for NICS reporting that may 
    obviate the need to enact legislation at the State level.
        Comment: One commenter requested that the Department clarify how 
    HIPAA's preemption provisions would apply to State laws requiring or 
    prohibiting covered entities' disclosures of NICS data.
        Response: We clarify that this final rule does not change HIPAA's 
    existing preemption provisions, which provide that the HIPAA rules 
    preempt contrary State laws (with certain exceptions, such as where the 
    contrary provision of State law is more stringent than the HIPAA 
    provision).\39\ Accordingly, because the Privacy Rule, as modified by 
    this final rule, only permits (but does not require) the disclosure for 
    NICS reporting purposes, State laws that prohibit such disclosures are 
    not contrary to the Privacy Rule, and covered entities in States with 
    such laws remain subject to any applicable prohibitions against the 
    disclosures under State law. That is, the covered entity could comply 
    with both HIPAA and such State law by not disclosing PHI to the NICS.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \39\ See 45 CFR 160.203.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Moreover, HIPAA contains an express permission for disclosures that 
    are required by other law, such as State law. Accordingly, State laws 
    that require disclosures, for any purposes, remain in effect, as such 
    laws are not contrary to the Privacy Rule.
        Comment: One commenter expressed concern that the rule would create 
    an opportunity for the abuse of private information, for example, by 
    allowing the government to disarm political dissidents who seek mental 
    health care,
    
    [[Page 393]]
    
    or making it possible for medical personnel to abuse their authority 
    and remove an individual's rights for illegitimate reasons.
        Response: Concerns about governmental or private actors taking 
    advantage of this permission to target vulnerable persons are addressed 
    by the procedural framework built into the statute that established the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor and its implementing regulations, 
    which this final rule does not change. As we previously have noted, the 
    Federal mental health prohibitor, which makes an individual reportable 
    to the NICS, applies only to the extent that the individual is 
    involuntarily committed or determined by a court, board, commission, or 
    other lawful authority to be a danger to self or others, or is unable 
    to manage his or her own affairs due to a mental illness or condition. 
    \40\ These involuntary commitments and other adjudications are not made 
    independently by individual health care providers without any form of 
    official legal review.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \40\ 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(4); 27 CFR 478.11.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Comments: Some commenters expressed concern that, by relaxing 
    HIPAA's privacy requirements, the proposed rule could result in 
    increased disclosures of private health information to the government. 
    Several commenters argued that the Federal government has a poor record 
    on protecting individuals' privacy and should not be entrusted with 
    health information. In contrast, another commenter noted that Federal 
    law, including the Privacy Act, prohibits access to the information in 
    the NICS database outside of the limited purposes authorized by law, 
    and information about specific firearms transfers is destroyed the day 
    after the transaction.
        Response: We agree that it is important to protect the privacy and 
    security of the information that is reported to the NICS and we note 
    that the NICS is subject to specific privacy and security 
    protections.\41\ In addition, we again emphasize that only very limited 
    information may be disclosed under this rule, and disclosures of 
    diagnostic or clinical information are expressly prohibited.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \41\ See 63 FR 58303 (October 30, 1998), codified at 28 CFR part 
    25.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        Comment: Finally, one commenter requested clarification on whether, 
    in States where a covered entity is also a lawful authority that orders 
    involuntary commitments or conducts other adjudications that make 
    individuals subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor, there is 
    intended to be a separation between the covered entity and lawful 
    authority functions of the entity.
        Response: We note that, under the Privacy Rule, both before and 
    after the modification made in this final rule, a covered entity could 
    provide for such separation by operating as a hybrid entity, and 
    disclose information through its non-HIPAA covered NICS reporting unit. 
    However, it is our understanding that some covered entities may be 
    unable to achieve hybrid entity status for administrative or other 
    reasons. This is another reason for including the express permission 
    described in the final rule.
    
    VI. Regulatory Analyses
    
    A. Introduction
    
        We have prepared a regulatory impact statement in compliance with 
    Executive Order 12866 (September 1993, Regulatory Planning and Review), 
    Executive Order 13563 (January 2011, Improving Regulation and 
    Regulatory Review), the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) (September 19, 
    1980, Pub. L. 96-354), the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA) 
    (March 22, 1995, Pub. L. 104-4), and Executive Order 13132 on 
    Federalism.
    1. Executive Order 12866 and Executive Order 13563
        Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 direct agencies to assess all 
    costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, if 
    regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize 
    net benefits (including potential economic, environmental, public 
    health and safety effects, distributive impacts, and equity). Executive 
    Order 13563 emphasizes the importance of quantifying both costs and 
    benefits, of reducing costs, of harmonizing rules, and of promoting 
    flexibility. This rule has been designated a ``significant regulatory 
    action'' although not economically significant, under section 3(f) of 
    Executive Order 12866. Accordingly, this rule has been reviewed by the 
    Office of Management and Budget.
        A regulatory impact analysis must be prepared for all major rules 
    that have economically significant effects ($100 million or more in any 
    one year) or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector 
    of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, 
    public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal government or 
    communities (58 FR 51741). Because the final rule does not contain any 
    new requirements or prohibitions for covered entities, we estimate that 
    the rule will be cost neutral. We did not receive public comments on 
    this assumption or information indicating that covered entities will 
    incur any costs as a result of the rule.
        Although we expect the economic impact of the rule, including non-
    quantifiable costs and savings discussed in the regulatory analysis 
    below, to be less than $100 million annually, we nevertheless conducted 
    an analysis of the costs of the final rule.
    2. Entities Subject to the Rule
        This final rule applies only to covered entities that function as 
    repositories of information relevant to the Federal mental health 
    prohibitor on behalf of a State or that are responsible for ordering 
    the involuntary commitments or other adjudications that make an 
    individual subject to the Federal mental health prohibitor. We do not 
    have sufficient data to determine the number of affected entities, but, 
    based on the information available to us, we believe there would be 
    very few. Our understanding is that, for the most part, formal 
    adjudications and repository functions of this nature are conducted by 
    entities, such as court systems or law enforcement agencies, that are 
    not covered by HIPAA. In addition, even covered entities in some states 
    will not be affected because they currently do not face HIPAA barriers 
    to reporting either because state law requires reporting or they have 
    created hybrid entities, as described above in the preamble. We did not 
    receive public comments on the number of covered entities that will be 
    affected by this rule.
    
    B. Why is this rule needed?
    
        This final rule is needed to ensure that, where HIPAA covered 
    entities make adjudications causing individuals to become subject to 
    the Federal mental health prohibitor, or serve as repositories of 
    records of such adjudications on behalf of States, those covered 
    entities can report the identities of those individuals to the NICS. 
    This rule change can help further the important public safety goal of 
    strengthening the background check system to ensure that individuals 
    who are prohibited from purchasing or possessing firearms are not able 
    to obtain them. Specific permission under the Privacy Rule for these 
    disclosures is necessary to the extent that some States have not 
    enacted laws requiring reporting to the NICS, but a covered entity in 
    the State is nevertheless responsible for such reporting and does not 
    become a hybrid entity. Importantly, the final rule permits only a 
    small subset of HIPAA covered entities (i.e.,
    
    [[Page 394]]
    
    those that perform the relevant mental health adjudications or 
    repository functions) to use or disclose only limited, non-clinical 
    information, for NICS purposes. This narrowly tailored permission 
    permits these important uses or disclosures for public safety to occur 
    while maintaining a separation between reporting functions and the 
    mental health treatment a patient might be receiving.
    
    C. Qualitative Analysis of Unquantified Costs
    
        The rule is cost neutral with respect to HIPAA covered entities. 
    The rule does not require entities that already have a NICS reporting 
    process in place to change their current system and does not create new 
    reporting or recordkeeping requirements for any covered entity. The 
    small number of covered entities that are newly permitted to report to 
    the NICS or a State repository under the rule can begin to report and 
    may need to develop policies and procedures to do so. As the Privacy 
    Rule only allows the use or disclosure of information, and does not 
    require it, any resulting burden of reporting and associated procedures 
    are attributable to the choice made by an entity to report information, 
    the Federal statutory mental health prohibitor, and the NICS system 
    itself. See 28 CFR part 25, subpart A. We acknowledge that those 
    entities that choose to begin reporting may wish to address this change 
    in their HIPAA policies and procedures, as well as explain their 
    procedures to office staff. However, the rule does not require any 
    changes to existing HIPAA policies and procedures. In addition, with 
    respect to training, the rule does not require workforce training 
    beyond what is already required under the HIPAA Privacy and Security 
    Rules. We expect that entities that choose to report under the rule 
    would also take steps to ensure that their office staff have copies of 
    the new policies and procedures, which would not involve any 
    significant additional costs. We did not receive public comments 
    contradicting these assumptions or estimating the number of entities 
    that might begin to report to the NICS for the first time, if any.
        To the extent that the rule permits some covered entities to report 
    to the NICS for the first time, there may be an increase in the number 
    of individuals whose identities are newly included in the NICS and who 
    are denied a firearm transfer as a result. Therefore, there may be a 
    concomitant increase in applications for ``relief from disabilities'' 
    in states that provide such a relief program. However, any burden to 
    individuals completing and submitting the relief application form is 
    attributable to the Federal mental health prohibitor and the procedures 
    established by the State where the commitment or adjudication occurred. 
    The procedures for applying for relief in States that have established 
    mental health prohibitor ``relief from disabilities'' programs pursuant 
    to the NICS Improvement Amendments Act of 2007 vary.
        We received a number of comments on the NPRM asserting that 
    creating an express permission in the Privacy Rule for NICS reporting 
    would discourage individuals from seeking needed mental health care. We 
    appreciate these concerns and agree with commenters who asserted that 
    individuals' health and the public's safety are best served by 
    encouraging appropriate treatment. We also recognize that discouraging 
    treatment could increase the burden of untreated mental conditions to 
    individuals, in the form of increased suffering and loss of 
    productivity; to the health care system, when individuals with 
    untreated mental illness need emergency hospitalization, for example; 
    and to the public's safety. However, many of these commenters expressed 
    the mistaken belief that the permission would allow or require most 
    mental health care providers to report their patients to the NICS.
        As explained above, we have carefully and narrowly tailored the 
    final rule to apply only to a small number of covered entities that may 
    be responsible for the adjudications that make an individual subject to 
    the Federal mental health prohibitor, or that serve as repositories of 
    data about such adjudications. The rule generally maintains a 
    separation between treatment functions and NICS reporting functions. In 
    addition, the rule does not permit the use or disclosure of any 
    diagnostic or clinical information, or any other information about an 
    individual that is not needed for NICS reporting purposes. Because of 
    these strict limitations on the permitted uses and disclosures, we 
    believe that individuals will not be dissuaded from seeking needed 
    mental health care services as a result of the rule.
        Finally, we recognize the intangible burden to individuals of the 
    negative attitudes and misperceptions associated with mental health 
    conditions. We note that the Federal mental health prohibitor does not 
    apply to all individuals with mental health conditions, but instead to 
    a subset of individuals who have been involuntarily committed or 
    determined by a lawful authority to be a danger to themselves or 
    others, or unable to manage their own affairs, as a result of marked 
    subnormal intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or 
    disease. This rule permits a limited number of HIPAA covered entities 
    to report to the NICS the identities of individuals in a particular 
    subcategory of persons who are currently prohibited by Federal law from 
    possessing firearms. This permission facilitates the enforcement of 
    prohibitions that were established by the Gun Control Act. Therefore, 
    we do not expect that this rule will exacerbate negative attitudes or 
    misperceptions associated with mental health conditions.
    
    D. Qualitative Analysis of Unquantified Benefits
    
        While we believe that there may be benefits to public safety as a 
    result of the rule, we are not able to monetize the value of such 
    benefits.
        For example, by removing a barrier to reporting, the rule may 
    result in increased reporting to the NICS of individuals who may pose a 
    risk of gun violence related to a serious mental health condition. To 
    the extent that this rule permits covered entities to report those 
    individuals' identities for NICS purposes, the rule provides a public 
    safety benefit. One comment submitted in response to the NPRM noted 
    that increased reporting could contribute to lowering the substantial 
    financial costs of gun violence itself, which was estimated at $174 
    billion in medical and lost productivity expenses in 2010.\42\ However, 
    we do not have information about whether, or how many, covered entities 
    would begin to report or increase reporting to the NICS as a result of 
    the rule, nor do we have a basis for estimating the impact, if any, on 
    the financial costs associated with gun violence.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        \42\ This comment cited Miller TR. The Cost of Firearm Violence. 
    Children's Safety Network Economics and Data Analysis Resource 
    Center, at Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation, December 
    2012.
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
        An additional benefit of the rule is that it provides clarity about 
    the applicability of the Privacy Rule and its relationship to State 
    law. Specifically, the rule alleviates the concerns of State lawmakers 
    who, according to several commenters on the ANPRM, may be reluctant to 
    pursue State legislation requiring entities to report Federal mental 
    health prohibitor information for NICS purposes because of a 
    misconception that the HIPAA Privacy Rule would preempt such 
    requirements. As explained more fully above, the Privacy Rule permits 
    uses and disclosures that are required by law, and
    
    [[Page 395]]
    
    thus would not preempt a State law requiring disclosures to NICS. 
    However, to the extent that State lawmakers harbor this misconception, 
    this preamble clarifies HIPAA's preemption provisions and the final 
    rule provides an avenue for NICS reporting that may obviate the need to 
    enact legislation at the State level.
    
    E. Additional Regulatory Analyses
    
    1. Regulatory Flexibility Act
        The RFA requires agencies to analyze and consider options for 
    reducing regulatory burden if a rule will impose a significant burden 
    on a substantial number of small entities. The Act requires the head of 
    the agency either to certify that the rule will not impose such a 
    burden or to perform a regulatory flexibility analysis and consider 
    alternatives to lessen the burden. For the reasons explained more fully 
    above in the summary of costs and benefits, it is not expected that the 
    rule will result in compliance costs for covered entities of any size 
    because the rule does not impose new requirements. Therefore, the 
    Secretary certifies that the rule will not have a significant impact on 
    a substantial number of small entities.
    2. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
        Section 202 of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (UMRA) 
    requires that agencies assess anticipated costs and benefits before 
    issuing any rule whose mandates would require spending in any one year 
    $100 million in 1995 dollars, updated annually for inflation. In 2013, 
    that threshold is approximately $141 million dollars. UMRA does not 
    address the total cost of a rule. Rather, it focuses on certain 
    categories of cost, mainly those ``Federal mandate'' costs resulting 
    from: (1) Imposing enforceable duties on State, local, or Tribal 
    governments, or on the private sector; or (2) increasing the stringency 
    of conditions in, or decreasing the funding of, State, local, or Tribal 
    governments under entitlement programs. As this rule does not impose 
    enforceable duties or affect entitlement programs, UMRA does not 
    require us to prepare an analysis of the costs and benefits of the 
    rule. Nonetheless, we have done so in accordance with Executive Orders 
    12866 and 13563, and present this analysis in sections C and D above.
    3. Federalism
        Executive Order 13132 establishes certain requirements that an 
    agency must meet when it promulgates a rule that imposes substantial 
    direct requirement costs on State and local governments, preempts State 
    law, or otherwise has Federalism implications.
        The Federalism implications of the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules 
    were assessed as required by Executive Order 13132 and published as 
    part of the preambles to the final rules on December 28, 2000 (65 FR 
    82462, 82797) and February 20, 2003 (68 FR 8334, 8373), respectively. 
    This final rule does not impose requirements, or any associated costs, 
    on State and local governments. Regarding preemption, the preamble to 
    the final Privacy Rule explained that the HIPAA statute dictates the 
    relationship between State law and Privacy Rule requirements. 
    Therefore, the Privacy Rule's existing preemption provisions do not 
    raise Federalism issues, and these provisions are not affected by this 
    rule.
        One commenter argued that a permission for entities other than 
    States to report to the NICS would bypass the decisions of the States 
    regarding the submission of reports and, therefore, raises federalism 
    implications. In response, we again emphasize that this rule does not 
    require covered entities to make disclosures that are prohibited by 
    State law, nor does it prevent disclosures required by State law. 
    Further, States retain discretion to determine which entities within 
    the State are authorized to report information to the NICS. For these 
    reasons, the rule does not have Federalism implications.
    
    F. Accounting Statement
    
        Whenever a rule is considered a significant rule under Executive 
    Order 12866, we are required to develop an accounting statement 
    indicating the costs associated with the rule. As explained above, we 
    expect that the rule is cost neutral. We did not receive public 
    comments on any unanticipated costs associated with the rule, including 
    costs to covered entities that choose to amend written HIPAA policies 
    and procedures or to provide additional training to staff.
    
    VII. Collection of Information Requirements
    
        This final rule does not contain requests or requirements to report 
    information to the government, nor does it impose new requirements for 
    recordkeeping or disclosures to third-parties or the public. Therefore, 
    the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act with respect to 
    information collections do not apply.
    
    List of Subjects in 45 CFR Part 164
    
        Administrative practice and procedure, Computer technology, 
    Electronic information system, Electronic transactions, Employer 
    benefit plan, Health, Health care, Health facilities, Health insurance, 
    Health records, Hospitals, Medicaid, Medical research, Medicare, 
    Privacy, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, and Security.
    
        For the reasons set forth in the preamble, the Department of Health 
    and Human Services amends 45 CFR Subtitle A, Subchapter C, part 164, as 
    set forth below:
    
    PART 164--SECURITY AND PRIVACY
    
    0
    1. The authority citation for part 164 continues to read as follows:
    
        Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302(a); 42 U.S.C. 1320d-1320d-9; sec. 264, 
    Public Law 104-191, 110 Stat. 2033-2034 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2(note)); 
    and secs. 13400-13424, Public Law 111-5, 123 Stat. 258-279.
    
    
    0
    2. Amend Sec.  164.512 by adding paragraph (k)(7) to read as follows:
    
    
    Sec.  164.512  Uses and disclosures for which an authorization or 
    opportunity to agree or object is not required.
    
    * * * * *
        (k) * * *
        (7) National Instant Criminal Background Check System. A covered 
    entity may use or disclose protected health information for purposes of 
    reporting to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System the 
    identity of an individual who is prohibited from possessing a firearm 
    under 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(4), provided the covered entity:
        (i) Is a State agency or other entity that is, or contains an 
    entity that is:
        (A) An entity designated by the State to report, or which collects 
    information for purposes of reporting, on behalf of the State, to the 
    National Instant Criminal Background Check System; or
        (B) A court, board, commission, or other lawful authority that 
    makes the commitment or adjudication that causes an individual to 
    become subject to 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(4); and
        (ii) Discloses the information only to:
        (A) The National Instant Criminal Background Check System; or
        (B) An entity designated by the State to report, or which collects 
    information for purposes of reporting, on behalf of the State, to the 
    National Instant Criminal Background Check System; and
        (iii)(A) Discloses only the limited demographic and certain other 
    information needed for purposes of reporting to the National Instant 
    Criminal Background Check System; and
    
    [[Page 396]]
    
        (B) Does not disclose diagnostic or clinical information for such 
    purposes.
    * * * * *
    
        Dated: December 30, 2015.
    Sylvia M. Burwell,
    Secretary.
    [FR Doc. 2015-33181 Filed 1-4-16; 4:15 pm]
    BILLING CODE 4153-01-P
    
    
    

