
    [Federal Register Volume 81, Number 1 (Monday, January 4, 2016)]
    [Rules and Regulations]
    [Pages 5-8]
    From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [[www.gpo.gov](http://www.gpo.gov)]
    [FR Doc No: 2015-33026]
    
    
    =======================================================================
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
    
    Food and Drug Administration
    
    21 CFR Part 176
    
    [Docket No. FDA-2015-F-0714]
    
    
    Indirect Food Additives: Paper and Paperboard Components
    
    AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.
    
    ACTION: Final rule.
    
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA or we) is amending the 
    food additive regulations to no longer provide for the use of three 
    specific perfluoroalkyl ethyl containing food-contact substances (FCSs) 
    as oil and water repellants for paper and paperboard for use in contact 
    with aqueous and fatty foods because new data are available as to the 
    toxicity of substances structurally similar to these compounds that 
    demonstrate there is no longer a reasonable certainty of no harm from 
    the food-contact use of these FCSs. This action is in response to a 
    petition filed by the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Center for 
    Food Safety, the Breast Cancer Fund, the Center for Environmental 
    Health, Clean Water Action, the Center for Science in the Public 
    Interest, Children's Environmental Health Network, Environmental 
    Working Group, and Improving Kids' Environment.
    
    DATES: This rule is effective January 4, 2016. Submit either electronic 
    or written objections and requests for a hearing by February 3, 2016. 
    See section VIII for further information on the filing of objections.
    
    ADDRESSES: You may submit objections and requests for a hearing as 
    follows:
    
    Electronic Submissions
    
        Submit electronic objections in the following way:
         Federal eRulemaking Portal: <http://www.regulations.gov>. 
    Follow the instructions for submitting comments. Objections submitted 
    electronically, including attachments, to <http://www.regulations.gov> 
    will be posted to the docket unchanged. Because your objection will be 
    made public, you are solely responsible for ensuring that your 
    objection does not include any confidential information that you or a 
    third party may not wish to be posted, such as medical information, 
    your or anyone else's Social Security number, or confidential business 
    information, such as a manufacturing process. Please note that if you 
    include your name, contact information, or other information that 
    identifies you in the body of your objection, that information will be 
    posted on <http://www.regulations.gov>.
         If you want to submit an objection with confidential 
    information that you do not wish to be made available to the public, 
    submit the objection as a written/paper submission and in the manner 
    detailed (see ``Written/Paper Submissions'' and ``Instructions'').
    
    Written/Paper Submissions
    
        Submit written/paper submissions in the following way:
         Mail/Hand delivery/Courier (for written/paper 
    submissions): Division of Dockets Management (HFA-305), Food and Drug 
    Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852.
         For written/paper objections submitted to the Division of 
    Dockets Management, FDA will post your objection, as well as any 
    attachments, except for information submitted, marked and identified, 
    as confidential, if submitted as detailed in ``Instructions.''
        Instructions: All submissions received must include the Docket No. 
    FDA-
    
    [[Page 6]]
    
    2015-F-0714 for ``Indirect Food Additives: Paper and Paperboard 
    Components.'' Received objections will be placed in the docket and, 
    except for those submitted as ``Confidential Submissions,'' publicly 
    viewable at <http://www.regulations.gov> or at the Division of Dockets 
    Management between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.
         Confidential Submissions--To submit an objection with 
    confidential information that you do not wish to be made publicly 
    available, submit your objections only as a written/paper submission. 
    You should submit two copies total. One copy will include the 
    information you claim to be confidential with a heading or cover note 
    that states ``THIS DOCUMENT CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.'' The 
    Agency will review this copy, including the claimed confidential 
    information, in its consideration of comments. The second copy, which 
    will have the claimed confidential information redacted/blacked out, 
    will be available for public viewing and posted on <http://www.regulations.gov>. Submit both copies to the Division of Dockets 
    Management. If you do not wish your name and contact information to be 
    made publicly available, you can provide this information on the cover 
    sheet and not in the body of your comments and you must identify this 
    information as ``confidential.'' Any information marked as 
    ``confidential'' will not be disclosed except in accordance with 21 CFR 
    10.20 and other applicable disclosure law. For more information about 
    FDA's posting of comments to public dockets, see 80 FR 56469, September 
    18, 2015, or access the information at: <http://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/dockets/default.htm>.
        Docket: For access to the docket to read background documents or 
    the electronic and written/paper comments received, go to <http://www.regulations.gov> and insert the docket number, found in brackets in 
    the heading of this document, into the ``Search'' box and follow the 
    prompts and/or go to the Division of Dockets Management, 5630 Fishers 
    Lane, Rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852.
    
    FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Paul Honigfort, Center for Food Safety 
    and Applied Nutrition (HFS-275), Food and Drug Administration, 5100 
    Paint Branch Pkwy., College Park, MD 20740-3835, 240-402-1206.
    
    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
    
    I. Background
    
        In a notice published in the Federal Register on March 16, 2015 (80 
    FR 13508), we announced that we filed a food additive petition (FAP 
    4B4809) submitted by the Natural Resources Defense Council, 1152 15th 
    St. NW., Suite 300, Washington, DC 20005; the Center for Food Safety, 
    303 Sacramento St., Second Floor, San Francisco, CA 94111; Clean Water 
    Action, 1444 Eye St. NW., Suite 400, Washington, DC 20005; the Center 
    for Science in the Public Interest, 1220 L St. NW., Suite 300, 
    Washington, DC 20005; Children's Environmental Health Network, 110 
    Maryland Ave. NE., Suite 404, Washington, DC 20002; the Breast Cancer 
    Fund, 1388 Sutter St., Suite 400, San Francisco, CA 94109-5400; the 
    Center for Environmental Health, 2201 Broadway, Suite 302, Oakland, CA 
    94612; Environmental Working Group, 1436 U St. NW., Suite 100, 
    Washington, DC 20009; and Improving Kids' Environment, 1915 West 18th 
    St., Indianapolis, IN 46202.
        The petition proposed to amend Sec.  176.170 (21 CFR 176.170) to no 
    longer provide for the use of three perfluoroalkyl ethyl containing 
    FCSs as oil and water repellants for paper and paperboard for use in 
    contact with aqueous and fatty foods. The three FCSs which are the 
    subjects of this petition are as follows:
    
        1. Diethanolamine salts of mono- and bis (1H,1H,2H,2H 
    perfluoroalkyl) phosphates where the alkyl group is even-numbered in 
    the range C8-C18 and the salts have a fluorine content of 52.4 
    percent to 54.4 percent as determined on a solids basis;
        2. Pentanoic acid, 4,4-bis [(gamma-omega-perfluoro-C8-20-
    alkyl)thio] derivatives, compounds with diethanolamine (CAS Reg. No. 
    71608-61-2); and
        3. Perfluoroalkyl substituted phosphate ester acids, ammonium 
    salts formed by the reaction of 2,2-bis[([gamma], [omega]-perfluoro 
    C4-20 alkylthio) methyl]-1,3-propanediol, polyphosphoric acid and 
    ammonium hydroxide.
    
    II. Evaluation of Safety
    
        The three subject FCSs are regulated as food additives under the 
    Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the FD&C; Act). Section 409 of the 
    FD&C; Act (21 U.S.C. 348) sets forth the statutory requirements for food 
    additives. Section 201(s) of the FD&C; Act (21 U.S.C. 321(s)) includes 
    substances intended for use in producing, manufacturing, packing, 
    processing, preparing, treating, packaging, transporting, or holding 
    food among the substances defined as food additives, provided the 
    intended use results or may reasonably be expected to result in it 
    becoming a component of food and those uses were not sanctioned prior 
    to 1958 or are not generally recognized as safe among experts qualified 
    by scientific training and experience to evaluate its safety.
        Under section 402(a)(2)(c)(1) of the FD&C; Act (21 U.S.C. 
    342(a)(2)(c)(1)), food shall be deemed to be adulterated if it is or if 
    it bears or contains any food additive that is unsafe within the 
    meaning of section 409 of the FD&C; Act. A food additive shall be deemed 
    to be unsafe under section 409 of the FD&C; Act, in relevant part, 
    unless its use conforms to a food additive regulation or an effective 
    food contact notification. Section 409(i) of the FD&C; Act states that 
    the procedure for amending or repealing a regulation shall conform to 
    the procedure for the promulgation of such regulations. FDA's 
    regulations specific to the administrative actions for food additives 
    provide that the Commissioner, either on his own initiative or on the 
    petition of any interested person, may propose the issuance of a 
    regulation amending or repealing a regulation pertaining to a food 
    additive (Sec.  171.130(a) (21 CFR 171.130(a)). These regulations 
    further provide that any such petition must include an assertion of 
    facts, supported by data, showing that new information exists with 
    respect to the food additive or that new uses have been developed or 
    old uses abandoned, that new data are available as to toxicity of the 
    chemical, or that experience with the existing regulation or exemption 
    may justify its amendment or appeal. New data must be furnished in the 
    form specified in Sec.  171.1 (21 CFR 171.1) and 21 CFR 171.100 for 
    submitting petitions (see Sec.  171.130(b)). Under these regulations, a 
    petitioner may propose that we amend a food additive regulation if the 
    petitioner can demonstrate that new data are available as to the 
    toxicity of the food additive that may justify amendment of the food 
    additive regulation.
        Under section 409(c)(3) of the FD&C; Act we will not establish a 
    regulation for the use of a food additive if a fair evaluation of the 
    data fails to establish that the proposed use of the food additive, 
    under the conditions of use to be specified in the regulation, will be 
    safe. Our regulations, at 21 CFR 170.3(h)(i), define safety as ``a 
    reasonable certainty in the minds of competent scientists that the 
    substance is not harmful under the intended conditions of use.'' In 
    order for FDA to grant a petition that seeks an amendment to a food 
    additive regulation based upon new data concerning the toxicity of the 
    food additive, such data must be adequate for FDA to conclude that 
    there is no longer
    
    [[Page 7]]
    
    a reasonable certainty of no harm for the intended use of the 
    substance.
        The petition asserts that publically available information on long-
    chain perfluorinated compounds as a chemical class, which has become 
    available after the food contact use of the three FCSs was approved, 
    demonstrates that there is no longer a reasonable certainty of no harm 
    from the food contact use of the three FCSs as listed in Sec.  176.170.
        All three of the FCSs subject to the petition contain extended 
    alkyl chains where all of the hydrogens are replaced by fluorine (hence 
    the FCSs are ``perfluorinated''). The toxicological profile of extended 
    perfluorinated alkyl chains varies with chain length: On a general 
    basis, those with extended perfluorinated alkyl chains greater than or 
    equal to eight carbons in length demonstrate biopersistence in chronic 
    feeding studies, while those with extended perfluorinated alkyl chains 
    less than eight carbons in length do not (Ref. 1). Biopersistence is 
    defined as persistence and accumulation of a material in a biological 
    tissue due to preferential deposition of the material in the tissue 
    combined with resistance of the material to removal from the tissue by 
    natural clearance mechanisms (Ref. 2). As such, compounds containing 
    extended perfluorinated alkyl chains are often classified as long- 
    (i.e., >= eight carbons in length) or short-chain perfluorinated 
    compounds, with implications for toxicology analysis including 
    consideration of biopersistence. All three of the FCSs contain extended 
    perfluorinated alkyl chains >= eight carbons in length and as such are 
    long-chain perfluorinated compounds (PFCs).
        The petition cites a 2010 FDA comprehensive review memorandum on 
    the available literature for long-chain PFCs (Ref. 3). This memorandum 
    noted that available data on long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and 
    fluorotelomer alcohols, both of which are subsets of long-chain PFCs, 
    demonstrate reproductive and developmental toxicity in animal models. 
    The FDA memorandum determined that, based on structural similarity to 
    long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and fluorotelomer alcohols, and in 
    the absence of contradictory data, data demonstrating reproductive and 
    developmental toxicity for long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and 
    fluorotelomer alcohols was applicable to long-chain PFCs on a general 
    basis. The petition asserts that, as the three subject FCSs are long-
    chain PFCs, the concern for reproductive and developmental toxicity for 
    long-chain PFCs as determined in FDA's 2010 comprehensive review 
    memorandum is applicable to these three FCSs. The petition also 
    provides the results of an updated comprehensive literature search, 
    which the petition asserts reinforces the concern for reproductive and 
    developmental toxicity for long-chain PFCs. The petition also asserts 
    that the updated literature search did not discover any information 
    which would contradict FDA's 2010 determination that data demonstrating 
    reproductive and developmental toxicity for long-chain 
    perfluorocarboxylic acids and fluorotelomer alcohols was applicable to 
    long-chain PFCs on a general basis.
        Upon review of the available information, FDA has confirmed our 
    2010 determination that data demonstrating reproductive and 
    developmental toxicity for long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and 
    fluorotelomer alcohols are applicable to long-chain PFCs on a general 
    basis (Ref. 4). FDA's updated review noted that there are no available 
    toxicological studies conducted with the three FCSs that address the 
    endpoints of reproductive or developmental toxicity. As all three FCSs 
    are long-chain PFCs, and in the absence of data specific to the three 
    FCSs to address these endpoints, FDA utilized the available data 
    demonstrating reproductive and developmental toxicity for long-chain 
    perfluorocarboxylic acids and fluorotelomer alcohols to assess the 
    safety of the approved food-contact use of the FCSs. FDA's updated 
    review noted deficiencies in the available information used to 
    determine migration of the FCSs into food as a result of their approved 
    food-contact use (Ref. 5). For this reason FDA was unable to calculate 
    consumer exposure to the FCSs in a manner which would allow a 
    quantitative assessment of the safety of that exposure in the context 
    of the available data demonstrating reproductive and developmental 
    toxicity for long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and fluorotelomer 
    alcohols. However, FDA's review noted that available data demonstrate 
    that long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids and fluorotelomer alcohols 
    biopersist in animals and that this biopersistence also occurs in 
    humans (Ref. 4). Although available migration information does not 
    allow a quantitative assessment of the safety of exposure to these 
    FCSs, the reproductive and development toxicity of the three FCSs can 
    be qualitatively assessed in the context of biopersistence and the 
    expectation that chronic dietary exposure to these FCSs would result in 
    a systemic exposure to the FCSs or their metabolic by-products at 
    levels higher than their daily dietary exposure (Ref. 4).
    
    III. Comments on the Filing Notice
    
        We received very few comments on the petition. These comments 
    stated that the use of the three FCSs as listed in Sec.  176.170 has 
    been abandoned.
        The basis for the action requested in the petition is that new data 
    are available as to the toxicity of substances structurally similar to 
    the subject FCSs that justify amending Sec.  176.170. The petition is 
    not based on abandonment of the approved food contact use of these 
    three FCSs. We have made a determination that the information provided 
    in the petition and other publicly available relevant data demonstrates 
    that there is no longer a reasonable certainty of no harm for the food 
    contact use of the three FCS.
    
    IV. Conclusion
    
        We reviewed the data and information in the petition and other 
    available relevant material to evaluate whether new data are available 
    as to the toxicity of the subject FCSs that justify amendment of Sec.  
    176.170. As a result of this review, we concluded that data for subsets 
    of long-chain PFCs (demonstrating biopersistence and reproductive and 
    developmental toxicity) are applicable to long-chain PFCs on a general 
    basis and that this data raises significant questions as to the safety 
    of the authorized uses of the three FCSs subject to the petition (Ref. 
    4). We also concluded that there is a lack of data specific to the 
    three subject FCSs subject to the petition to address these questions 
    (Ref. 4). For these reasons, in the absence of data specific to the 
    three FCSs to address reproductive and developmental toxicity, adequate 
    migration data to determine dietary exposure to the FCSs from the food-
    contact use, and sufficient data to account for a consumer's systemic 
    exposure resulting from chronic dietary exposure to these FCSs, we 
    conclude that there is no longer a reasonable certainty of no harm for 
    the food contact use of these FCSs. Therefore, we are amending part 176 
    as set forth in this document. Upon the effective date (see DATES), 
    these food additive uses are no longer authorized.
    
    V. Public Disclosure
    
        In accordance with Sec.  171.1(h), the petition and the documents 
    that we considered and relied upon in reaching our decision to approve 
    the petition will
    
    [[Page 8]]
    
    be made available for public disclosure (see FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 
    CONTACT). As provided in Sec.  171.1(h), we will delete from the 
    documents any materials that are not available for public disclosure.
    
    VI. Environmental Impact
    
        We have considered the environmental effects of this rule. As 
    stated in the March 16, 2015, Federal Register notice of petition for 
    FAP 4B4809 (80 FR 13508), we have determined, under 21 CFR 25.15(c), 
    that this action ``is of a type that does not individually or 
    cumulatively have a significant effect on the human environment'' such 
    that neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental impact 
    statement is required, as set forth in 21 CFR 25.32(m). We have not 
    received any new information or comments that would affect our previous 
    determination.
    
    VII. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
    
        This final rule contains no collection of information. Therefore, 
    clearance by the Office of Management and Budget under the Paperwork 
    Reduction Act of 1995 is not required.
    
    VIII. Objections
    
        If you will be adversely affected by one or more provisions of this 
    regulation, you may file with the Division of Dockets Management (see 
    ADDRESSES) either electronic or written objections. You must separately 
    number each objection, and within each numbered objection you must 
    specify, with particularity, the provision(s) to which you object and 
    the grounds for your objection. Within each numbered objection, you 
    must specifically state whether you are requesting a hearing on the 
    particular provision that you specify in that numbered objection. If 
    you do not request a hearing for any particular objection, you waive 
    the right to a hearing on that objection. If you request a hearing, 
    your objection must include a detailed description and analysis of the 
    specific factual information you intend to present in support of the 
    objection in the event that a hearing is held. If you do not include 
    such a description and analysis for any particular objection, you waive 
    the right to a hearing on the objection.
        Any objections received in response to the regulation may be seen 
    in the Division of Dockets Management between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday 
    through Friday, and will be posted to the docket at <http://www.regulations.gov>. We will publish notice of the objections that we 
    have received or lack thereof in the Federal Register.
    
    IX. References
    
        The following references have been placed on display in the 
    Division of Dockets Management (see ADDRESSES) and are available for 
    viewing by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through 
    Friday; they are also available electronically at <http://www.regulations.gov>. FDA has verified the Web site addresses, as of the 
    date this document publishes in the Federal Register, but Web sites are 
    subject to change over time.
    
        1. Rice, P.A. ``C6-Perfluorinated Compounds: The New 
    Greaseproofing Agents in Food Packaging,'' Current Environmental 
    Health Reports, 2:1, pp. 33-40, 2015.
        2. International Agency for Research on Cancer, <http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol81/mono81-8.pdf>.
        3. FDA Memorandum from P. Rice to P. Honigfort, September 30, 
    2010.
        4. FDA Memorandum from P. Rice to P. Honigfort, July 27, 2015.
        5. FDA Memorandum from J. Cooper to P. Honigfort, July 23, 2015.
    
    List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 176
    
        Food additives, Food packaging.
    
        Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under 
    authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs and re-
    delegated to the Director, Center for Food Safety and Applied 
    Nutrition, 21 CFR part 176 is amended as follows:
    
    PART 176--INDIRECT FOOD ADDITIVES: PAPER AND PAPERBOARD COMPONENTS
    
    0
    1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 176 continues to read as 
    follows:
    
        Authority: 21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 346, 348, 379e.
    
    
    Sec.  176.170  [Amended]
    
    0
    2. Amend Sec.  176.170 in the table in paragraph (a)(5) by removing the 
    entries for ``Diethanolamine salts of mono- and bis,'' ``Pentanoic 
    acid,'' and ``Perfluoroalkyl substituted phosphate ester acids.''
    
        Dated: December 29, 2015.
    Susan Bernard,
    Director, Office of Regulations, Policy and Social Sciences, Center for 
    Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.
    [FR Doc. 2015-33026 Filed 12-31-15; 8:45 am]
     BILLING CODE 4164-01-P
    
    
    

